["Travel Health Notices | Travelers&#39; Health | CDC  Skip directly to search  Skip directly to A to Z list  Skip directly to page options  Skip directly to site content  Start of Search Controls  Search Form Controls  Cancel  Submit  Search The CDC  CDC A-Z Index  MENU  CDC A-Z  SEARCH  A  B  C  D  E  F  G  H  I  J  K  L  M  N  O  P  Q  R  S  T  U  V  W  X  Y  Z  #  Search Form Controls  Search The CDC  submit  Start of Search Controls  Search Form Controls  Travelers' Health  Note: Javascript is disabled or is not supported by your browser. For this reason, some items on this page will be unavailable. For more information about this message, please visit this page: About CDC.gov .  Home Destinations Travel Notices Zika Travel Information World Map of Zika Questions and Answers: Zika risk at high elevations Guidelines for US Citizens and Residents Living in Areas with Zika Guidelines for Travelers Visiting Friends and Family in Areas with Chikungunya, Dengue, or Zika Viajeros que visitan amigos y familiares en \u00e1reas con chikungu\u00f1a, dengue o zika Visiting Friends or Family in an Area with Zika? Find a Clinic Yellow Fever Vaccination Clinics FAQ Stamaril clinics Disease Directory Resources Resources for Travelers Adventure Travel Animal Safety Blood Clots Bug Bites Business Travel Cold Climates Counterfeit Drugs Cruise Ship Travel Families with Children Fish Poisoning in Travelers Food and Water Getting Health Care Abroad Getting Sick After Travel High Altitudes Hot Climates Humanitarian Aid Workers Humanitarian Aid Workers in Ecuador Insurance International Adoption Jet Lag Last-Minute Travel Long-Term Travel Mass Gatherings Medical Tourism Mental Health Motion Sickness Natural Disasters Pregnant Travelers Road Safety Senior Citizens Sex Tourism STDs Sun Exposure Swimming and Diving Study Abroad Tick Bites Travelers' Diarrhea Travelers with Chronic Illnesses Travelers with a Disability Travelers with Weakened Immune Systems Traveling with Your Pet Visiting Friends or Relatives Water Disinfection Infographics for Travelers MERS Health Advisory poster Food and Water: What's Safer Health Advisory: MERS Pictograms Risky vs. Safer Food and Water: What to Know Website Guide Infographics: Prevent Bug Bites Ebola Outbreak - Recently in West Africa? Ebola Outbreak - Going to West Africa? Zika Infographic: Inbound and Outbound Travelers Zika Infographic: Outbound Travelers Zika Infographic: Inbound Travelers Zika infographic: Enjoy Your Vacation Pack smart to prevent Zika Prevent Zika after travel Traveler Survival Guide Learn About Destination See a Doctor Pre-Travel Appointment Your Health Status How Diseases Spread Pack Smart Plan Ahead Sick While Traveling Know and Share Info Traveler Registration During Trip After Your Trip CDC-TV Videos Resources For Clinicians In-Clinic Quick Links Clinician Updates Clinical Updates CE Courses and Training Presentations for Health Professionals Yellow Fever Vaccine Course About the Yellow Fever Vaccine Course Continuing Education (CE) Credit for Yellow Fever Vaccine Course Travel Medicine References: Books, Journals, Articles & Websites Resources for the Travel Industry Yellow Book Contents Chapter 1 Introduction to Travel Health & the Yellow Book Planning for Healthy Travel: CDC Travelers' Health Website and Mobile Applications Travel Epidemiology Perspectives: Why Guidelines Differ Air Travel Trends Tables Maps Figures Boxes Updates About the Yellow Book In Memoriam: A Tribute to Alan J. Magill Partners GeoSentinel Global TravEpiNet Mobile Apps RSS Feeds  Travel Health Notices  Recommend on Facebook  Tweet  Share Compartir  Types of Notices  Warning Level 3, Avoid Nonessential Travel  Alert Level 2, Practice Enhanced Precautions  Watch Level 1, Practice Usual Precautions  Read More  Current Notices  Search By Country Name or Disease  Travel notices are designed to inform travelers and clinicians about current health issues related to specific destinations. These issues may arise from disease outbreaks, special events or gatherings, natural disasters, or other conditions that may affect travelers&rsquo; health. See below for more information on our travel notice categories.  For country-specific information about Safety and Security, visit the US Department of State Travel Alerts and Warnings page.  For country-specific information about weather conditions, visit the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) International Weather Selector webpage.  For a list of all Zika virus travel notices by region, visit Zika travel information .  Alert Level 2, Practice Enhanced Precautions  The annual Hajj, or pilgrimage to Mecca, Saudi Arabia, is among the largest mass gatherings in the world. Because of the crowds, mass gatherings such as Hajj and Umrah are associated with unique health risks. Before you go, you should visit a travel health specialist for advice, make sure you are up to date on all routine and recommended vaccines, and learn about other health and safety issues that could affect you during your trip.Hajj and Umrah in Saudi Arabia  Updated  Hajj and Umrah in Saudi Arabia  June 28, 2017  The annual Hajj, or pilgrimage to Mecca, Saudi Arabia, is among the largest mass gatherings in the world. Because of the crowds, mass gatherings such as Hajj and Umrah are associated with unique health risks. Before you go, you should visit a travel health specialist for advice, make sure you are up to date on all routine and recommended vaccines, and learn about other health and safety issues that could affect you during your trip.  Read More &gt;&gt;  The following countries in or near the Arabian Peninsula have confirmed MERS: Bahrain, Iran, Jordan, Kuwait, Lebanon, Oman, Qatar, Saudia Arabia, United Arab Emirates, and Yemen. Neighboring countries where precautions are recommended: Iraq, Israel, including the West Bank and Gaza, and Syria. MERS in the Arabian Peninsula  Updated  MERS in the Arabian Peninsula  June 28, 2017  The following countries in or near the Arabian Peninsula have confirmed MERS: Bahrain, Iran, Jordan, Kuwait, Lebanon, Oman, Qatar, Saudia Arabia, United Arab Emirates, and Yemen. Neighboring countries where precautions are recommended: Iraq, Israel, including the West Bank and Gaza, and Syria.  Read More &gt;&gt;  The Brazilian Ministry of Health has reported an ongoing outbreak of yellow fever starting in December 2016. In response to this outbreak, health authorities have recently expanded the list of areas in which yellow fever vaccination is recommended for travelers.Yellow Fever in Brazil  Yellow Fever in Brazil  April 17, 2017  The Brazilian Ministry of Health has reported an ongoing outbreak of yellow fever starting in December 2016. In response to this outbreak, health authorities have recently expanded the list of areas in which yellow fever vaccination is recommended for travelers.  Read More &gt;&gt;  Local transmission of Zika virus infection (Zika) has been reported in Argentina. Local mosquito transmission means that mosquitoes in the area are infected with Zika virus and are spreading it to people.Zika Virus in Argentina  Zika Virus in Argentina  March 31, 2017  Local transmission of Zika virus infection (Zika) has been reported in Argentina. Local mosquito transmission means that mosquitoes in the area are infected with Zika virus and are spreading it to people.  Read More &gt;&gt;  Cases of malaria have been reported in parts of three provinces in South Africa where transmission of the disease does not usually occur. Malaria in South Africa  Malaria in South Africa  March 27, 2017  Cases of malaria have been reported in parts of three provinces in South Africa where transmission of the disease does not usually occur.  Read More &gt;&gt;  Local transmission of Zika virus infection (Zika) has been reported. Local transmission means that mosquitoes in the area have been infected with Zika virus, spreading it to people.Zika Virus in Marshall Islands  Zika Virus in Marshall Islands  March 10, 2017  Local transmission of Zika virus infection (Zika) has been reported. Local transmission means that mosquitoes in the area have been infected with Zika virus, spreading it to people.  Read More &gt;&gt;  Local transmission of Zika virus infection (Zika) has been reported. Local transmission means that mosquitoes in the area have been infected with Zika virus, spreading it to people.Zika Virus in French Guiana  Zika Virus in French Guiana  March 10, 2017  Local transmission of Zika virus infection (Zika) has been reported. Local transmission means that mosquitoes in the area have been infected with Zika virus, spreading it to people.  Read More &gt;&gt;  Local transmission of Zika virus infection (Zika) has been reported. Local transmission means that mosquitoes in the area have been infected with Zika virus, spreading it to people.Zika Virus in Cape Verde  Zika Virus in Cape Verde  March 10, 2017  Local transmission of Zika virus infection (Zika) has been reported. Local transmission means that mosquitoes in the area have been infected with Zika virus, spreading it to people.  Read More &gt;&gt;  Local transmission of Zika virus infection (Zika) has been reported. Local transmission means that mosquitoes in the area have been infected with Zika virus, spreading it to people.Zika Virus in Bonaire  Zika Virus in Bonaire  March 10, 2017  Local transmission of Zika virus infection (Zika) has been reported. Local transmission means that mosquitoes in the area have been infected with Zika virus, spreading it to people.  Read More &gt;&gt;  Local transmission of Zika virus infection (Zika) has been reported. Local transmission means that mosquitoes in the area have been infected with Zika virus, spreading it to people.Zika Virus in Honduras  Zika Virus in Honduras  March 10, 2017  Local transmission of Zika virus infection (Zika) has been reported. Local transmission means that mosquitoes in the area have been infected with Zika virus, spreading it to people.  Read More &gt;&gt;  Local transmission of Zika virus infection (Zika) has been reported. Local transmission means that mosquitoes in the area have been infected with Zika virus, spreading it to people.Zika Virus in Guyana  Zika Virus in Guyana  March 10, 2017  Local transmission of Zika virus infection (Zika) has been reported. Local transmission means that mosquitoes in the area have been infected with Zika virus, spreading it to people.  Read More &gt;&gt;  Local transmission of Zika virus infection (Zika) has been reported. Local transmission means that mosquitoes in the area have been infected with Zika virus, spreading it to people.Zika Virus in Cura\u00e7ao  Zika Virus in Cura\u00e7ao  March 10, 2017  Local transmission of Zika virus infection (Zika) has been reported. Local transmission means that mosquitoes in the area have been infected with Zika virus, spreading it to people.  Read More &gt;&gt;  Local transmission of Zika virus infection (Zika) has been reported. Local transmission means that mosquitoes in the area have been infected with Zika virus, spreading it to people.Zika Virus in Samoa  Zika Virus in Samoa  March 10, 2017  Local transmission of Zika virus infection (Zika) has been reported. Local transmission means that mosquitoes in the area have been infected with Zika virus, spreading it to people.  Read More &gt;&gt;  Local transmission of Zika virus infection (Zika) has been reported. Local transmission means that mosquitoes in the area have been infected with Zika virus, spreading it to people.Zika Virus in Trinidad and Tobago  Zika Virus in Trinidad and Tobago  March 10, 2017  Local transmission of Zika virus infection (Zika) has been reported. Local transmission means that mosquitoes in the area have been infected with Zika virus, spreading it to people.  Read More &gt;&gt;  Local mosquito transmission of Zika virus infection (Zika) has been reported from Fiji. Local mosquito transmission means that mosquitoes in the area are infected with Zika virus and are spreading it to people.Zika Virus in Fiji  Zika Virus in Fiji  March 10, 2017  Local mosquito transmission of Zika virus infection (Zika) has been reported from Fiji. Local mosquito transmission means that mosquitoes in the area are infected with Zika virus and are spreading it to people.  Read More &gt;&gt;  Local transmission of Zika virus infection (Zika) has been reported. Local transmission means that mosquitoes in the area have been infected with Zika virus, spreading it to people.Zika Virus in Sint Maarten  Zika Virus in Sint Maarten  March 10, 2017  Local transmission of Zika virus infection (Zika) has been reported. Local transmission means that mosquitoes in the area have been infected with Zika virus, spreading it to people.  Read More &gt;&gt;  Local transmission of Zika virus infection (Zika) has been reported. Local transmission means that mosquitoes in the area have been infected with Zika virus, spreading it to people.Zika Virus in Mexico  Zika Virus in Mexico  March 10, 2017  Local transmission of Zika virus infection (Zika) has been reported. Local transmission means that mosquitoes in the area have been infected with Zika virus, spreading it to people.  Read More &gt;&gt;  Local transmission of Zika virus infection (Zika) has been reported. Local transmission means that mosquitoes in the area have been infected with Zika virus, spreading it to people.Zika Virus in Barbados  Zika Virus in Barbados  March 10, 2017  Local transmission of Zika virus infection (Zika) has been reported. Local transmission means that mosquitoes in the area have been infected with Zika virus, spreading it to people.  Read More &gt;&gt;  Local transmission of Zika virus infection (Zika) has been reported. Local transmission means that mosquitoes in the area have been infected with Zika virus, spreading it to people.Zika Virus in Aruba  Zika Virus in Aruba  March 10, 2017  Local transmission of Zika virus infection (Zika) has been reported. Local transmission means that mosquitoes in the area have been infected with Zika virus, spreading it to people.  Read More &gt;&gt;  Local transmission of Zika virus infection (Zika) has been reported. Local transmission means that mosquitoes in the area have been infected with Zika virus, spreading it to people.Zika Virus in Colombia  Zika Virus in Colombia  March 10, 2017  Local transmission of Zika virus infection (Zika) has been reported. Local transmission means that mosquitoes in the area have been infected with Zika virus, spreading it to people.  Read More &gt;&gt;  Local transmission of Zika virus infection (Zika) has been reported. Local transmission means that mosquitoes in the area have been infected with Zika virus, spreading it to people.Zika Virus in Bolivia  Zika Virus in Bolivia  March 10, 2017  Local transmission of Zika virus infection (Zika) has been reported. Local transmission means that mosquitoes in the area have been infected with Zika virus, spreading it to people.  Read More &gt;&gt;  Local transmission of Zika virus infection (Zika) has been reported. Local transmission means that mosquitoes in the area have been infected with Zika virus, spreading it to people.Zika Virus in US Virgin Islands  Zika Virus in US Virgin Islands  March 10, 2017  Local transmission of Zika virus infection (Zika) has been reported. Local transmission means that mosquitoes in the area have been infected with Zika virus, spreading it to people.  Read More &gt;&gt;  Local transmission of Zika virus infection (Zika) has been reported. Local transmission means that mosquitoes in the area have been infected with Zika virus, spreading it to people.Zika Virus in Suriname  Zika Virus in Suriname  March 10, 2017  Local transmission of Zika virus infection (Zika) has been reported. Local transmission means that mosquitoes in the area have been infected with Zika virus, spreading it to people.  Read More &gt;&gt;  Local transmission of Zika virus infection (Zika) has been reported. Local transmission means that mosquitoes in the area have been infected with Zika virus, spreading it to people.Zika Virus in Costa Rica  Zika Virus in Costa Rica  March 10, 2017  Local transmission of Zika virus infection (Zika) has been reported. Local transmission means that mosquitoes in the area have been infected with Zika virus, spreading it to people.  Read More &gt;&gt;  Local transmission of Zika virus infection (Zika) has been reported. Local transmission means that mosquitoes in the area have been infected with Zika virus, spreading it to people.Zika Virus in Ecuador  Zika Virus in Ecuador  March 10, 2017  Local transmission of Zika virus infection (Zika) has been reported. Local transmission means that mosquitoes in the area have been infected with Zika virus, spreading it to people.  Read More &gt;&gt;  Local transmission of Zika virus infection (Zika) has been reported. Local transmission means that mosquitoes in the area have been infected with Zika virus, spreading it to people.Zika Virus in the Dominican Republic  Zika Virus in the Dominican Republic  March 10, 2017  Local transmission of Zika virus infection (Zika) has been reported. Local transmission means that mosquitoes in the area have been infected with Zika virus, spreading it to people.  Read More &gt;&gt;  Local transmission of Zika virus infection (Zika) has been reported. Local transmission means that mosquitoes in the area have been infected with Zika virus, spreading it to people.Zika Virus in Jamaica  Zika Virus in Jamaica  March 10, 2017  Local transmission of Zika virus infection (Zika) has been reported. Local transmission means that mosquitoes in the area have been infected with Zika virus, spreading it to people.  Read More &gt;&gt;  Local transmission of Zika virus infection (Zika) has been reported. Local transmission means that mosquitoes in the area have been infected with Zika virus, spreading it to people. Zika Virus in Guatemala  Zika Virus in Guatemala  March 10, 2017  Local transmission of Zika virus infection (Zika) has been reported. Local transmission means that mosquitoes in the area have been infected with Zika virus, spreading it to people.  Read More &gt;&gt;  Local transmission of Zika virus infection (Zika) has been reported. Local transmission means that mosquitoes in the area have been infected with Zika virus, spreading it to people.Zika Virus in El Salvador  Zika Virus in El Salvador  March 10, 2017  Local transmission of Zika virus infection (Zika) has been reported. Local transmission means that mosquitoes in the area have been infected with Zika virus, spreading it to people.  Read More &gt;&gt;  Local transmission of Zika virus infection (Zika) has been reported. Local transmission means that mosquitoes in the area have been infected with Zika virus, spreading it to people.Zika Virus in Venezuela  Zika Virus in Venezuela  March 10, 2017  Local transmission of Zika virus infection (Zika) has been reported. Local transmission means that mosquitoes in the area have been infected with Zika virus, spreading it to people.  Read More &gt;&gt;  Local transmission of Zika virus infection (Zika) has been reported. Local transmission means that mosquitoes in the area have been infected with Zika virus, spreading it to people.Zika Virus in Panama  Zika Virus in Panama  March 10, 2017  Local transmission of Zika virus infection (Zika) has been reported. Local transmission means that mosquitoes in the area have been infected with Zika virus, spreading it to people.  Read More &gt;&gt;  Local transmission of Zika virus infection (Zika) has been reported. Local transmission means that mosquitoes in the area have been infected with Zika virus, spreading it to people.Zika Virus in Nicaragua  Zika Virus in Nicaragua  March 10, 2017  Local transmission of Zika virus infection (Zika) has been reported. Local transmission means that mosquitoes in the area have been infected with Zika virus, spreading it to people.  Read More &gt;&gt;  Local transmission of Zika virus infection (Zika) has been reported. Local transmission means that mosquitoes in the area have been infected with Zika virus, spreading it to people.Zika Virus in Tonga  Zika Virus in Tonga  March 10, 2017  Local transmission of Zika virus infection (Zika) has been reported. Local transmission means that mosquitoes in the area have been infected with Zika virus, spreading it to people.  Read More &gt;&gt;  Local transmission of Zika virus infection (Zika) has been reported. Local transmission means that mosquitoes in the area have been infected with Zika virus, spreading it to people.Zika Virus in Puerto Rico  Zika Virus in Puerto Rico  March 10, 2017  Local transmission of Zika virus infection (Zika) has been reported. Local transmission means that mosquitoes in the area have been infected with Zika virus, spreading it to people.  Read More &gt;&gt;  Local transmission of Zika virus infection (Zika) has been reported. Local transmission means that mosquitoes in the area have been infected with Zika virus, spreading it to people.Zika Virus in Papua New Guinea  Zika Virus in Papua New Guinea  March 10, 2017  Local transmission of Zika virus infection (Zika) has been reported. Local transmission means that mosquitoes in the area have been infected with Zika virus, spreading it to people.  Read More &gt;&gt;  Local mosquito transmission of Zika virus infection (Zika) has been reported. Local mosquito transmission means that mosquitoes in the area are infected with Zika virus and are spreading it to people.Zika Virus in Peru  Zika Virus in Peru  March 10, 2017  Local mosquito transmission of Zika virus infection (Zika) has been reported. Local mosquito transmission means that mosquitoes in the area are infected with Zika virus and are spreading it to people.  Read More &gt;&gt;  Local mosquito transmission of Zika virus infection (Zika) has been reported in Micronesia. Local mosquito transmission means that mosquitoes in the area are infected with Zika virus and are spreading it to people.Zika Virus in Federated States of Micronesia  Zika Virus in Federated States of Micronesia  March 10, 2017  Local mosquito transmission of Zika virus infection (Zika) has been reported in Micronesia. Local mosquito transmission means that mosquitoes in the area are infected with Zika virus and are spreading it to people.  Read More &gt;&gt;  Local mosquito transmission of Zika virus infection (Zika) has been reported. Local mosquito transmission means that mosquitoes in the area are infected with Zika virus and are spreading it to people.Zika Virus in Saint Lucia  Zika Virus in Saint Lucia  March 10, 2017  Local mosquito transmission of Zika virus infection (Zika) has been reported. Local mosquito transmission means that mosquitoes in the area are infected with Zika virus and are spreading it to people.  Read More &gt;&gt;  Local transmission of Zika virus infection (Zika) has been reported. Local transmission means that mosquitoes in the area have been infected with Zika virus, spreading it to people.Zika Virus in Angola  Zika Virus in Angola  March 10, 2017  Local transmission of Zika virus infection (Zika) has been reported. Local transmission means that mosquitoes in the area have been infected with Zika virus, spreading it to people.  Read More &gt;&gt;  Local transmission of Zika virus infection (Zika) has been reported. Local transmission means that mosquitoes in the area have been infected with Zika virus, spreading it to people.Zika Virus in Maldives  Zika Virus in Maldives  March 10, 2017  Local transmission of Zika virus infection (Zika) has been reported. Local transmission means that mosquitoes in the area have been infected with Zika virus, spreading it to people.  Read More &gt;&gt;  Local mosquito transmission of Zika virus infection (Zika) has been reported. Local mosquito transmission means that mosquitoes in the area are infected with Zika virus and are spreading it to people.Zika Virus in Turks and Caicos Islands  Zika Virus in Turks and Caicos Islands  March 10, 2017  Local mosquito transmission of Zika virus infection (Zika) has been reported. Local mosquito transmission means that mosquitoes in the area are infected with Zika virus and are spreading it to people.  Read More &gt;&gt;  Local transmission of Zika virus infection (Zika) has been reported. Local transmission means that mosquitoes in the area have been infected with Zika virus, spreading it to people.Zika Virus in Saba  Zika Virus in Saba  March 10, 2017  Local transmission of Zika virus infection (Zika) has been reported. Local transmission means that mosquitoes in the area have been infected with Zika virus, spreading it to people.  Read More &gt;&gt;  Local mosquito transmission of Zika virus infection (Zika) has been reported. Local mosquito transmission means that mosquitoes in the area are infected with Zika virus and are spreading it to people.Zika Virus in Grenada  Zika Virus in Grenada  March 10, 2017  Local mosquito transmission of Zika virus infection (Zika) has been reported. Local mosquito transmission means that mosquitoes in the area are infected with Zika virus and are spreading it to people.  Read More &gt;&gt;  Local mosquito transmission of Zika virus infection (Zika) has been reported. Local mosquito transmission means that mosquitoes in the area are infected with Zika virus and are spreading it to people.Zika Virus in Antigua and Barbuda  Zika Virus in Antigua and Barbuda  March 10, 2017  Local mosquito transmission of Zika virus infection (Zika) has been reported. Local mosquito transmission means that mosquitoes in the area are infected with Zika virus and are spreading it to people.  Read More &gt;&gt;  Local mosquito transmission of Zika virus infection (Zika) has been reported. Local mosquito transmission means that mosquitoes in the area are infected with Zika virus and are spreading it to people.Zika Virus in Sint Eustatius  Zika Virus in Sint Eustatius  March 10, 2017  Local mosquito transmission of Zika virus infection (Zika) has been reported. Local mosquito transmission means that mosquitoes in the area are infected with Zika virus and are spreading it to people.  Read More &gt;&gt;  Local mosquito transmission of Zika virus infection (Zika) has been reported. Local mosquito transmission means that mosquitoes in the area are infected with Zika virus and are spreading it to people.Zika Virus in Dominica  Zika Virus in Dominica  March 10, 2017  Local mosquito transmission of Zika virus infection (Zika) has been reported. Local mosquito transmission means that mosquitoes in the area are infected with Zika virus and are spreading it to people.  Read More &gt;&gt;  Local transmission of Zika virus infection (Zika) has been reported. Local transmission means that mosquitoes in the area have been infected with Zika virus, spreading it to people.Zika Virus in Belize  Zika Virus in Belize  March 10, 2017  Local transmission of Zika virus infection (Zika) has been reported. Local transmission means that mosquitoes in the area have been infected with Zika virus, spreading it to people.  Read More &gt;&gt;  Local transmission of Zika virus infection (Zika) has been reported. Local transmission means that mosquitoes in the area have been infected with Zika virus, spreading it to people.Zika Virus in Anguilla  Zika Virus in Anguilla  March 10, 2017  Local transmission of Zika virus infection (Zika) has been reported. Local transmission means that mosquitoes in the area have been infected with Zika virus, spreading it to people.  Read More &gt;&gt;  Local mosquito transmission of Zika virus infection (Zika) has been reported. Local mosquito transmission means that mosquitoes in the area are infected with Zika virus and are spreading it to people.Zika Virus in Singapore  Zika Virus in Singapore  March 10, 2017  Local mosquito transmission of Zika virus infection (Zika) has been reported. Local mosquito transmission means that mosquitoes in the area are infected with Zika virus and are spreading it to people.  Read More &gt;&gt;  Local mosquito transmission of Zika virus infection (Zika) has been reported. Local mosquito transmission means that mosquitoes in the area are infected with Zika virus and are spreading it to people. Zika Virus in Saint Kitts and Nevis  Zika Virus in Saint Kitts and Nevis  March 10, 2017  Local mosquito transmission of Zika virus infection (Zika) has been reported. Local mosquito transmission means that mosquitoes in the area are infected with Zika virus and are spreading it to people.  Read More &gt;&gt;  Local transmission of Zika virus infection (Zika) has been reported. Local transmission means that mosquitoes in the area have been infected with Zika virus, spreading it to people.Zika Virus in Palau  Zika Virus in Palau  March 10, 2017  Local transmission of Zika virus infection (Zika) has been reported. Local transmission means that mosquitoes in the area have been infected with Zika virus, spreading it to people.  Read More &gt;&gt;  Local mosquito transmission of Zika virus infection (Zika) has been reported. Local mosquito transmission means that mosquitoes in the area are infected with Zika virus and are spreading it to people.Zika Virus in Cuba  Zika Virus in Cuba  March 10, 2017  Local mosquito transmission of Zika virus infection (Zika) has been reported. Local mosquito transmission means that mosquitoes in the area are infected with Zika virus and are spreading it to people.  Read More &gt;&gt;  Local transmission of Zika virus infection (Zika) has been reported. Local transmission means that mosquitoes in the area have been infected with Zika virus, spreading it to people.Zika Virus in Paraguay  Zika Virus in Paraguay  March 10, 2017  Local transmission of Zika virus infection (Zika) has been reported. Local transmission means that mosquitoes in the area have been infected with Zika virus, spreading it to people.  Read More &gt;&gt;  Local transmission of Zika virus infection (Zika) has been reported. Local transmission means that mosquitoes in the area have been infected with Zika virus, spreading it to people. Zika virus, spreading it to people.Zika Virus in Saint Vincent and the Grenadines  Zika Virus in Saint Vincent and the Grenadines  March 10, 2017  Local transmission of Zika virus infection (Zika) has been reported. Local transmission means that mosquitoes in the area have been infected with Zika virus, spreading it to people. Zika virus, spreading it to people.  Read More &gt;&gt;  Local transmission of Zika virus infection (Zika) has been reported. Local transmission means that mosquitoes in the area have been infected with Zika virus, spreading it to people.Zika Virus in Saint Martin  Zika Virus in Saint Martin  March 10, 2017  Local transmission of Zika virus infection (Zika) has been reported. Local transmission means that mosquitoes in the area have been infected with Zika virus, spreading it to people.  Read More &gt;&gt;  Local transmission of Zika virus infection (Zika) has been reported. Local transmission means that mosquitoes in the area have been infected with Zika virus, spreading it to people.Zika Virus in the Solomon Islands  Zika Virus in the Solomon Islands  March 10, 2017  Local transmission of Zika virus infection (Zika) has been reported. Local transmission means that mosquitoes in the area have been infected with Zika virus, spreading it to people.  Read More &gt;&gt;  Public health officials have reported that mosquitoes in Montserrat are infected with Zika virus and are spreading it to people.Zika Virus in Montserrat  Zika Virus in Montserrat  March 10, 2017  Public health officials have reported that mosquitoes in Montserrat are infected with Zika virus and are spreading it to people.  Read More &gt;&gt;  Local transmission of Zika virus infection (Zika) has been reported. Local transmission means that mosquitoes in the area have been infected with Zika virus, spreading it to people.Zika Virus in Guinea-Bissau  Zika Virus in Guinea-Bissau  March 10, 2017  Local transmission of Zika virus infection (Zika) has been reported. Local transmission means that mosquitoes in the area have been infected with Zika virus, spreading it to people.  Read More &gt;&gt;  Local mosquito transmission of Zika virus infection (Zika) has been reported. Local mosquito transmission means that mosquitoes in the area are infected with Zika virus and are spreading it to people.Zika Virus in Cayman Islands  Zika Virus in Cayman Islands  March 10, 2017  Local mosquito transmission of Zika virus infection (Zika) has been reported. Local mosquito transmission means that mosquitoes in the area are infected with Zika virus and are spreading it to people.  Read More &gt;&gt;  Local mosquito transmission of Zika virus infection (Zika) has been reported. Local mosquito transmission means that mosquitoes in the area are infected with Zika virus and are spreading it to people.Zika Virus in The Bahamas  Zika Virus in The Bahamas  March 10, 2017  Local mosquito transmission of Zika virus infection (Zika) has been reported. Local mosquito transmission means that mosquitoes in the area are infected with Zika virus and are spreading it to people.  Read More &gt;&gt;  Local mosquito transmission of Zika virus infection (Zika) has been reported. Local mosquito transmission means that mosquitoes in the area are infected with Zika virus and are spreading it to people.Zika Virus in the British Virgin Islands  Zika Virus in the British Virgin Islands  March 10, 2017  Local mosquito transmission of Zika virus infection (Zika) has been reported. Local mosquito transmission means that mosquitoes in the area are infected with Zika virus and are spreading it to people.  Read More &gt;&gt;  According to Global Polio Eradication Initiative, one vaccine-derived poliovirus case was identified in Nigeria in May 2015. CDC recommends that all travelers to Nigeria be fully vaccinated against polio. Polio in Nigeria  Polio in Nigeria  November 02, 2016  According to Global Polio Eradication Initiative, one vaccine-derived poliovirus case was identified in Nigeria in May 2015. CDC recommends that all travelers to Nigeria be fully vaccinated against polio.  Read More &gt;&gt;  Watch Level 1, Practice Usual Precautions  Health officials in France have reported an outbreak of measles. Measles in France  New  Measles in France  July 07, 2017  Health officials in France have reported an outbreak of measles.  Read More &gt;&gt;  Health officials in the Democratic Republic of the Congo have reported an outbreak of measles.Measles in Democratic Republic of the Congo  New  Measles in Democratic Republic of the Congo  July 07, 2017  Health officials in the Democratic Republic of the Congo have reported an outbreak of measles.  Read More &gt;&gt;  Health officials in Pakistan have reported a large outbreak of chickenpox, also known as varicella. Cases in children and adults, including deaths, have been reported in 10 districts. Chickenpox (varicella) in Pakistan  Chickenpox (varicella) in Pakistan  June 02, 2017  Health officials in Pakistan have reported a large outbreak of chickenpox, also known as varicella. Cases in children and adults, including deaths, have been reported in 10 districts.  Read More &gt;&gt;  The Fiji Ministry of Health and Medical Services has declared a dengue outbreak. Travelers to Fiji should protect themselves against mosquito bites to avoid getting dengue.Dengue in Fiji  Dengue in Fiji  May 12, 2017  The Fiji Ministry of Health and Medical Services has declared a dengue outbreak. Travelers to Fiji should protect themselves against mosquito bites to avoid getting dengue.  Read More &gt;&gt;  A malaria epidemic has been declared by the Burundi Ministry of Health. CDC continues to recommend that travelers to Burundi take prescription medicine to prevent malaria.Malaria in Burundi  Malaria in Burundi  April 24, 2017  A malaria epidemic has been declared by the Burundi Ministry of Health. CDC continues to recommend that travelers to Burundi take prescription medicine to prevent malaria.  Read More &gt;&gt;  Health officials in Belgium have reported an outbreak of measles. CDC recommends that travelers to Belgium protect themselves by making sure they are vaccinated against measles.Measles in Belgium  Measles in Belgium  April 17, 2017  Health officials in Belgium have reported an outbreak of measles. CDC recommends that travelers to Belgium protect themselves by making sure they are vaccinated against measles.  Read More &gt;&gt;  Health officials in Italy have reported an outbreak of measles. CDC recommends that travelers to Italy protect themselves by making sure they are vaccinated against measles.Measles in Italy  Measles in Italy  April 17, 2017  Health officials in Italy have reported an outbreak of measles. CDC recommends that travelers to Italy protect themselves by making sure they are vaccinated against measles.  Read More &gt;&gt;  Health officials in Germany have reported an outbreak of measles. CDC recommends that travelers to Germany protect themselves by making sure they are vaccinated against measles.Measles in Germany  Measles in Germany  April 17, 2017  Health officials in Germany have reported an outbreak of measles. CDC recommends that travelers to Germany protect themselves by making sure they are vaccinated against measles.  Read More &gt;&gt;  Health officials in Australia, Canada, and Taiwan have reported several cases of measles in travelers returning from Indonesia, including the island of Bali.Measles in Indonesia  Measles in Indonesia  April 07, 2017  Health officials in Australia, Canada, and Taiwan have reported several cases of measles in travelers returning from Indonesia, including the island of Bali.  Read More &gt;&gt;  A measles outbreak has been reported in Guinea, with 13 of the country\u2019s 33 prefectures affected. CDC recommends that travelers to Guinea protect themselves by making sure they are vaccinated against measles, particularly infants 6\u201311 months of age (1 dose of measles vaccine) and children 12 months of age or older (2 doses of measles vaccine). Clinicians should keep measles in mind when treating patients with fever and rash, especially if the patient has recently traveled internationally.Measles in Guinea  Measles in Guinea  March 10, 2017  A measles outbreak has been reported in Guinea, with 13 of the country\u2019s 33 prefectures affected. CDC recommends that travelers to Guinea protect themselves by making sure they are vaccinated against measles, particularly infants 6\u201311 months of age (1 dose of measles vaccine) and children 12 months of age or older (2 doses of measles vaccine). Clinicians should keep measles in mind when treating patients with fever and rash, especially if the patient has recently traveled internationally.  Read More &gt;&gt;  Chinese health authorities have confirmed human cases of avian influenza A (H7N9) since September 2016. CDC advises people traveling to China to avoid contact with poultry (including poultry markets and farms), birds, and their droppings and to avoid eating undercooked poultry. Infected birds that appear healthy may still be able to transmit this virus to humans. Avian Flu (H7N9) in China  Avian Flu (H7N9) in China  March 07, 2017  Chinese health authorities have confirmed human cases of avian influenza A (H7N9) since September 2016. CDC advises people traveling to China to avoid contact with poultry (including poultry markets and farms), birds, and their droppings and to avoid eating undercooked poultry. Infected birds that appear healthy may still be able to transmit this virus to humans.  Read More &gt;&gt;  A measles outbreak has been reported in Romania. CDC recommends that travelers to Romania protect themselves by making sure they are vaccinated against measles, particularly infants 6\u201311 months of age (1 dose of measles vaccine) and children 12 months of age or older (2 doses of measles vaccine). Clinicians should keep measles in mind when treating patients with fever and rash, especially if the patient has recently traveled internationally.Measles in Romania  Measles in Romania  November 10, 2016  A measles outbreak has been reported in Romania. CDC recommends that travelers to Romania protect themselves by making sure they are vaccinated against measles, particularly infants 6\u201311 months of age (1 dose of measles vaccine) and children 12 months of age or older (2 doses of measles vaccine). Clinicians should keep measles in mind when treating patients with fever and rash, especially if the patient has recently traveled internationally.  Read More &gt;&gt;  The Pacific Public Health Surveillance Network (PacNet) has reported local transmission of chikungunya in Fiji. Local transmission means that mosquitoes in the area have been infected with chikungunya and are spreading it to people. Chikungunya in Fiji  Chikungunya in Fiji  November 07, 2016  The Pacific Public Health Surveillance Network (PacNet) has reported local transmission of chikungunya in Fiji. Local transmission means that mosquitoes in the area have been infected with chikungunya and are spreading it to people.  Read More &gt;&gt;  The following Caribbean countries have reported cases of chikungunya: Anguilla, Antigua, Aruba, Bahamas, British Virgin Islands, Cayman Islands, Dominican Republic, Haiti, Jamaica, Montserrat, Puerto Rico, Saint Barthelemy, Saint Kitts, Saint Lucia, Saint Martin (French), Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Sint Maarten (Dutch), Trinidad and Tobago, and Turks and Caicos Islands.Chikungunya in the Caribbean  Chikungunya in the Caribbean  November 07, 2016  The following Caribbean countries have reported cases of chikungunya: Anguilla, Antigua, Aruba, Bahamas, British Virgin Islands, Cayman Islands, Dominican Republic, Haiti, Jamaica, Montserrat, Puerto Rico, Saint Barthelemy, Saint Kitts, Saint Lucia, Saint Martin (French), Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Sint Maarten (Dutch), Trinidad and Tobago, and Turks and Caicos Islands.  Read More &gt;&gt;  Beginning in October 2014, locally transmitted cases of chikungunya have been reported in Mexico. Local transmission means that mosquitoes in Mexico have been infected with chikungunya and are spreading it to people. CDC recommends that travelers to Mexico protect themselves from chikungunya by preventing mosquito bites.Chikungunya in Mexico  Chikungunya in Mexico  November 07, 2016  Beginning in October 2014, locally transmitted cases of chikungunya have been reported in Mexico. Local transmission means that mosquitoes in Mexico have been infected with chikungunya and are spreading it to people. CDC recommends that travelers to Mexico protect themselves from chikungunya by preventing mosquito bites.  Read More &gt;&gt;  The following Central American countries have reported cases of chikungunya: Belize, Costa Rica, El Salvador, Guatemala, Honduras, Nicaragua, and Panama.Chikungunya in Central America  Chikungunya in Central America  November 07, 2016  The following Central American countries have reported cases of chikungunya: Belize, Costa Rica, El Salvador, Guatemala, Honduras, Nicaragua, and Panama.  Read More &gt;&gt;  The following South American countries have reported cases of chikungunya: Argentina, Bolivia, Brazil, Colombia, Ecuador, French Guiana, Paraguay, Peru, and Venezuela.Chikungunya in South America  Chikungunya in South America  November 07, 2016  The following South American countries have reported cases of chikungunya: Argentina, Bolivia, Brazil, Colombia, Ecuador, French Guiana, Paraguay, Peru, and Venezuela.  Read More &gt;&gt;  Travel Notice Definitions  CDC issues different types of notices for international travelers. As of April 5, 2013, these definitions have been refined to make the announcements more easily understood by travelers, health-care providers, and the general public. The definitions are laid out below. They describe both levels of risk for the traveler and recommended preventive measures to take at each level of risk.  Notice Level  Traveler Action  Risk to Traveler  Level 1: Watch  Reminder to follow usual precautions for this destination  Usual baseline risk or slightly above baseline risk for destination and limited impact to the traveler  Level 2: Alert  Follow enhanced precautions for this destination  Increased risk in defined settings or associated with specific risk factors; certain high-risk populations may wish to delay travel to these destinations  Level 3: Warning  Avoid all non-essential travel to this destination  High risk to travelers  File Formats Help: How do I view different file formats (PDF, DOC, PPT, MPEG) on this site?  Adobe PDF file  Microsoft PowerPoint file  Microsoft Word file  Microsoft Excel file  Audio/Video file  Apple Quicktime file  RealPlayer file  Text file  Zip Archive file  SAS file  ePub file  Page created: July 07, 2017  Page last updated: July 07, 2017  Page last reviewed: July 07, 2017  Content source:  Centers for Disease Control and Prevention  National Center for Emerging and Zoonotic Infectious Diseases (NCEZID)  Division of Global Migration and Quarantine (DGMQ)  Follow CDC  Email  Recommend  Tweet  Post  RSS  CDC Media  Listen  Watch  eCards  YouTube  About CDC  Employment  Newsroom  Training/Education  Funding  CDC's Organization  Mission and Vision  Using this Site  Legal  Link to Us  Policies  FOIA  Accessibility  Privacy  No FEAR Act  Inspector General  USA.gov  Contact CDC  Centers for Disease Control and Prevention  1600 Clifton Road  Atlanta ,  GA  30329-4027  USA  800-CDC-INFO (800-232-4636)  Contact CDC-INFO  TOP", "Zika Virus in Guatemala - Alert - Level 2, Practice Enhanced Precautions - Travel Health Notices | Travelers&#39; Health | CDC  Skip directly to search  Skip directly to A to Z list  Skip directly to page options  Skip directly to site content  Start of Search Controls  Search Form Controls  Cancel  Submit  Search The CDC  CDC A-Z Index  MENU  CDC A-Z  SEARCH  A  B  C  D  E  F  G  H  I  J  K  L  M  N  O  P  Q  R  S  T  U  V  W  X  Y  Z  #  Search Form Controls  Search The CDC  submit  Start of Search Controls  Search Form Controls  Travelers' Health  Note: Javascript is disabled or is not supported by your browser. For this reason, some items on this page will be unavailable. For more information about this message, please visit this page: About CDC.gov .  Home Destinations Travel Notices Zika Virus in Guatemala Zika Travel Information World Map of Zika Questions and Answers: Zika risk at high elevations Guidelines for US Citizens and Residents Living in Areas with Zika Guidelines for Travelers Visiting Friends and Family in Areas with Chikungunya, Dengue, or Zika Viajeros que visitan amigos y familiares en \u00e1reas con chikungu\u00f1a, dengue o zika Visiting Friends or Family in an Area with Zika? Find a Clinic Yellow Fever Vaccination Clinics FAQ Stamaril clinics Disease Directory Resources Resources for Travelers Adventure Travel Animal Safety Blood Clots Bug Bites Business Travel Cold Climates Counterfeit Drugs Cruise Ship Travel Families with Children Fish Poisoning in Travelers Food and Water Getting Health Care Abroad Getting Sick After Travel High Altitudes Hot Climates Humanitarian Aid Workers Humanitarian Aid Workers in Ecuador Insurance International Adoption Jet Lag Last-Minute Travel Long-Term Travel Mass Gatherings Medical Tourism Mental Health Motion Sickness Natural Disasters Pregnant Travelers Road Safety Senior Citizens Sex Tourism STDs Sun Exposure Swimming and Diving Study Abroad Tick Bites Travelers' Diarrhea Travelers with Chronic Illnesses Travelers with a Disability Travelers with Weakened Immune Systems Traveling with Your Pet Visiting Friends or Relatives Water Disinfection Infographics for Travelers MERS Health Advisory poster Food and Water: What's Safer Health Advisory: MERS Pictograms Risky vs. Safer Food and Water: What to Know Website Guide Infographics: Prevent Bug Bites Ebola Outbreak - Recently in West Africa? Ebola Outbreak - Going to West Africa? Zika Infographic: Inbound and Outbound Travelers Zika Infographic: Outbound Travelers Zika Infographic: Inbound Travelers Zika infographic: Enjoy Your Vacation Pack smart to prevent Zika Prevent Zika after travel Traveler Survival Guide Learn About Destination See a Doctor Pre-Travel Appointment Your Health Status How Diseases Spread Pack Smart Plan Ahead Sick While Traveling Know and Share Info Traveler Registration During Trip After Your Trip CDC-TV Videos Resources For Clinicians In-Clinic Quick Links Clinician Updates Clinical Updates CE Courses and Training Presentations for Health Professionals Yellow Fever Vaccine Course About the Yellow Fever Vaccine Course Continuing Education (CE) Credit for Yellow Fever Vaccine Course Travel Medicine References: Books, Journals, Articles & Websites Resources for the Travel Industry Yellow Book Contents Chapter 1 Introduction to Travel Health & the Yellow Book Planning for Healthy Travel: CDC Travelers' Health Website and Mobile Applications Travel Epidemiology Perspectives: Why Guidelines Differ Air Travel Trends Tables Maps Figures Boxes Updates About the Yellow Book In Memoriam: A Tribute to Alan J. Magill Partners GeoSentinel Global TravEpiNet Mobile Apps RSS Feeds  Zika Virus in Guatemala  Recommend on Facebook  Tweet  Share Compartir  Warning - Level 3, Avoid Nonessential Travel  Alert - Level 2, Practice Enhanced Precautions  Watch - Level 1, Practice Usual Precautions  Language:  Select  Espa&ntilde;ol  Note: This travel notice was updated on March 10, 2017, to include an interactive map of Zika risk.  What is the current situation?  Public health officials have reported that mosquitoes in Guatemala are infected with Zika virus and are spreading it to people.  Because Zika virus is primarily spread by mosquitoes, CDC recommends that travelers to Guatemala protect themselves from mosquito bites . The mosquitoes that spread Zika usually do not live at elevations above 6,500 feet (2,000 meters) because of environmental conditions. Travelers whose itineraries are limited to areas above this elevation are at minimal risk of getting Zika from a mosquito. The following map shows areas of Guatemala above and below 6,500 feet.* For more information, see Questions and Answers: Zika risk at high elevations .  Interactive web map: Search for a place by name, or pan, zoom, and click on the map to display additional information.  Zika Risk Areas  Area with risk of Zika  Area with minimal risk of ZIka  No known Zika  Note: Zika risk is determined according to altitude (height above sea level). Mosquitoes that spread Zika usually do not live at high altitudes (above 6,500 feet or 2,000 meters). The risk of getting Zika from a mosquito at high altitudes is less than at low altitudes.  Zika Virus in Pregnancy  A pregnant woman can pass Zika virus to her fetus. Infection during pregnancy can cause serious birth defects. CDC recommends special precautions for the following groups:  Women who are pregnant:  Should not travel to any area of Guatemala below 6,500 feet (see map).  If you must travel to one of these areas, talk to your doctor first and strictly follow steps to prevent mosquito bites during your trip. If your itinerary is limited entirely to areas above 6,500 feet, there is minimal risk of getting Zika from a mosquito.  Because Zika can also be spread by sex, if you have a partner who lives in or has traveled to Guatemala, either use condoms or do not have sex ( vaginal, anal, or oral ) or share sex toys during your pregnancy.  Women who are trying to become pregnant:  Before you or your partner travel, talk to your doctor about your plans to become pregnant and the risk of Zika virus infection.  See CDC guidance for how long you should wait to get pregnant after travel to Guatemala.  You and your partner should strictly follow steps to prevent mosquito bites .  If you have traveled to Guatemala and have a pregnant partner, use condoms or don&rsquo;t have sex (vaginal, anal, or oral) or share sex toys during the pregnancy.  Sexual transmission of Zika virus is also possible, so you should use condoms or not have sex during your trip.  Many people infected with Zika virus do not get sick. Among those who do develop symptoms, sickness is usually mild, with symptoms that last for several days to a week. Guillain-Barr&eacute; syndrome (GBS) is a rare disorder that can cause muscle weakness and paralysis for a few weeks to several months. CDC research suggests that GBS is strongly associated with Zika; however, only a small proportion of people with recent Zika virus infection get GBS. Most people fully recover from GBS, but some have permanent damage. For more information, see Zika and GBS .  As more information becomes available, this travel notice will be updated. Please check back frequently for the most up-to-date recommendations.  What can travelers do to prevent Zika?  There is no vaccine or medicine for Zika. You can protect yourself by preventing mosquito bites:  Cover exposed skin by wearing long-sleeved shirts and long pants.  Use EPA-registered insect repellents containing DEET, picaridin, oil of lemon eucalyptus (OLE, also called para-menthane-diol [PMD]), IR3535, or 2-undecanone (methyl nonyl ketone). Always use as directed.  Pregnant and breastfeeding women can use all EPA-registered insect repellents, including DEET, according to the product label.  Most repellents, including DEET, can be used on children older than 2 months. (OLE should not be used on children younger than 3 years.)  Use permethrin-treated clothing and gear (such as boots, pants, socks, and tents). You can buy pre-treated clothing and gear or treat them yourself.  Stay in places with air conditioning and window and door screens to keep mosquitoes outside.  Sleep under a mosquito bed net if air conditioned or screened rooms are not available or if sleeping outdoors.  Mosquito netting can be used to cover babies younger than 2 months old in carriers, strollers, or cribs to protect them from mosquito bites.  Because Zika can be spread by sex, if you have sex ( vaginal, anal, or oral ) while traveling, you should use condoms.  After travel:  Many people infected with Zika virus do not feel sick. If a mosquito bites an infected person while the virus is still in that person&rsquo;s blood, it can spread the virus by biting another person. If you travel to Guatemala, you should take steps to prevent mosquito bites for 3 weeks after your trip, even if you don&rsquo;t feel sick, so that you don&rsquo;t spread Zika to uninfected mosquitoes that can spread the virus to other people .  If you have visited Guatemala and have a pregnant partner, you should either use condoms or not have sex during the pregnancy.  If you are thinking about pregnancy, talk with your health care provider and wait to become pregnant (see &ldquo; Women Trying to Become Pregnant &rdquo; for how long to wait). You also should use condoms after travel to protect your sex partners from Zika even if you are not pregnant or trying to become pregnant.  For more information, see Zika and Sexual Transmission .  If you feel sick and think you may have Zika:  Talk to your doctor if you develop a fever with a rash, joint pain, or red eyes. Tell him or her about your travel.  Take acetaminophen (paracetamol) to relieve fever and pain. Do not take aspirin, products containing aspirin, or other nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, such as ibuprofen.  Get lots of rest and drink plenty of liquids.  If you are pregnant:  Talk to a doctor or other health care provider after your trip, even if you don&#39;t feel sick. Pregnant travelers returning from Guatemala, or who have had possible sexual exposure, should be offered testing for Zika virus infection.  If you develop a fever with a rash, joint pain, or red eyes, talk to your doctor immediately and tell him or her about your travel or possible sexual exposure.  If you do not have symptoms, testing should be offered if you see a health care provider, up to 12 weeks after you return from travel or your last possible sexual exposure.  Clinician Information  All pregnant women should be assessed for Zika virus exposure at each prenatal care visit. Possible exposures to Zika virus that warrant testing include:  Travel to or residence in an area with a current Zika outbreak.  Sex ( vaginal, anal, or oral ) with a partner who has traveled to or resides in an area with a current Zika outbreak.  The type of testing recommended varies according to when a woman&rsquo;s last possible exposure occurred or when her symptoms began. For more information, please visit the clinical guidance for healthcare providers caring for pregnant women .  Clinical Guidance for Healthcare Providers Caring for Infants &amp; Children is also available.  Additional Resources  For Travelers:  Zika Travel Information  Avoid Bug Bites  Insect Repellent Use and Safety  For Clinicians:  Zika: Information for Health Care Providers  Protection against Mosquitoes, Ticks, &amp; Other Insects &amp; Arthropods  File Formats Help: How do I view different file formats (PDF, DOC, PPT, MPEG) on this site?  Adobe PDF file  Microsoft PowerPoint file  Microsoft Word file  Microsoft Excel file  Audio/Video file  Apple Quicktime file  RealPlayer file  Text file  Zip Archive file  SAS file  ePub file  Page created: December 10, 2015  Page last updated: March 10, 2017  Page last reviewed: March 10, 2017  Content source:  Centers for Disease Control and Prevention  National Center for Emerging and Zoonotic Infectious Diseases (NCEZID)  Division of Global Migration and Quarantine (DGMQ)  Follow CDC  Email  Recommend  Tweet  Post  RSS  CDC Media  Listen  Watch  eCards  YouTube  About CDC  Employment  Newsroom  Training/Education  Funding  CDC's Organization  Mission and Vision  Using this Site  Legal  Link to Us  Policies  FOIA  Accessibility  Privacy  No FEAR Act  Inspector General  USA.gov  Contact CDC  Centers for Disease Control and Prevention  1600 Clifton Road  Atlanta ,  GA  30329-4027  USA  800-CDC-INFO (800-232-4636)  Contact CDC-INFO  TOP", "Zika Virus in Suriname - Alert - Level 2, Practice Enhanced Precautions - Travel Health Notices | Travelers&#39; Health | CDC  Skip directly to search  Skip directly to A to Z list  Skip directly to page options  Skip directly to site content  Start of Search Controls  Search Form Controls  Cancel  Submit  Search The CDC  CDC A-Z Index  MENU  CDC A-Z  SEARCH  A  B  C  D  E  F  G  H  I  J  K  L  M  N  O  P  Q  R  S  T  U  V  W  X  Y  Z  #  Search Form Controls  Search The CDC  submit  Start of Search Controls  Search Form Controls  Travelers' Health  Note: Javascript is disabled or is not supported by your browser. For this reason, some items on this page will be unavailable. For more information about this message, please visit this page: About CDC.gov .  Home Destinations Travel Notices Zika Virus in Suriname Zika Travel Information World Map of Zika Questions and Answers: Zika risk at high elevations Guidelines for US Citizens and Residents Living in Areas with Zika Guidelines for Travelers Visiting Friends and Family in Areas with Chikungunya, Dengue, or Zika Viajeros que visitan amigos y familiares en \u00e1reas con chikungu\u00f1a, dengue o zika Visiting Friends or Family in an Area with Zika? Find a Clinic Yellow Fever Vaccination Clinics FAQ Stamaril clinics Disease Directory Resources Resources for Travelers Adventure Travel Animal Safety Blood Clots Bug Bites Business Travel Cold Climates Counterfeit Drugs Cruise Ship Travel Families with Children Fish Poisoning in Travelers Food and Water Getting Health Care Abroad Getting Sick After Travel High Altitudes Hot Climates Humanitarian Aid Workers Humanitarian Aid Workers in Ecuador Insurance International Adoption Jet Lag Last-Minute Travel Long-Term Travel Mass Gatherings Medical Tourism Mental Health Motion Sickness Natural Disasters Pregnant Travelers Road Safety Senior Citizens Sex Tourism STDs Sun Exposure Swimming and Diving Study Abroad Tick Bites Travelers' Diarrhea Travelers with Chronic Illnesses Travelers with a Disability Travelers with Weakened Immune Systems Traveling with Your Pet Visiting Friends or Relatives Water Disinfection Infographics for Travelers MERS Health Advisory poster Food and Water: What's Safer Health Advisory: MERS Pictograms Risky vs. Safer Food and Water: What to Know Website Guide Infographics: Prevent Bug Bites Ebola Outbreak - Recently in West Africa? Ebola Outbreak - Going to West Africa? Zika Infographic: Inbound and Outbound Travelers Zika Infographic: Outbound Travelers Zika Infographic: Inbound Travelers Zika infographic: Enjoy Your Vacation Pack smart to prevent Zika Prevent Zika after travel Traveler Survival Guide Learn About Destination See a Doctor Pre-Travel Appointment Your Health Status How Diseases Spread Pack Smart Plan Ahead Sick While Traveling Know and Share Info Traveler Registration During Trip After Your Trip CDC-TV Videos Resources For Clinicians In-Clinic Quick Links Clinician Updates Clinical Updates CE Courses and Training Presentations for Health Professionals Yellow Fever Vaccine Course About the Yellow Fever Vaccine Course Continuing Education (CE) Credit for Yellow Fever Vaccine Course Travel Medicine References: Books, Journals, Articles & Websites Resources for the Travel Industry Yellow Book Contents Chapter 1 Introduction to Travel Health & the Yellow Book Planning for Healthy Travel: CDC Travelers' Health Website and Mobile Applications Travel Epidemiology Perspectives: Why Guidelines Differ Air Travel Trends Tables Maps Figures Boxes Updates About the Yellow Book In Memoriam: A Tribute to Alan J. Magill Partners GeoSentinel Global TravEpiNet Mobile Apps RSS Feeds  Zika Virus in Suriname  Recommend on Facebook  Tweet  Share Compartir  Warning - Level 3, Avoid Nonessential Travel  Alert - Level 2, Practice Enhanced Precautions  Watch - Level 1, Practice Usual Precautions  Language:  Select  Espa&ntilde;ol  What is the current situation?  Public health officials have reported that mosquitoes in Suriname are infected with Zika virus and are spreading it to people.  Because Zika virus is primarily spread by mosquitoes, CDC recommends that travelers to Suriname protect themselves from mosquito bites .  Zika Virus in Pregnancy  A pregnant woman can pass Zika virus to her fetus. Infection during pregnancy can cause serious birth defects. CDC recommends special precautions for the following groups:  Women who are pregnant:  Should not travel to Suriname.  If you must travel, talk to your doctor first and strictly follow steps to prevent mosquito bites during your trip.  Because Zika can also be spread by sex, if you have a partner who lives in or has traveled to Suriname, either use condoms or do not have sex ( vaginal, anal, or oral ) or share sex toys during your pregnancy.  Women who are trying to become pregnant:  Before you or your partner travel, talk to your doctor about your plans to become pregnant and the risk of Zika virus infection.  See CDC guidance for how long you should wait to get pregnant after travel to Suriname.  You and your partner should strictly follow steps to prevent mosquito bites .  If you have traveled to Suriname and have a pregnant partner, use condoms or don&rsquo;t have sex (vaginal, anal, or oral) or share sex toys during the pregnancy.  Sexual transmission of Zika virus is also possible, so you should use condoms or not have sex during your trip.  Many people infected with Zika virus do not get sick. Among those who do develop symptoms, sickness is usually mild, with symptoms that last for several days to a week. Guillain-Barr&eacute; syndrome (GBS) is a rare disorder that can cause muscle weakness and paralysis for a few weeks to several months. CDC research suggests that GBS is strongly associated with Zika; however, only a small proportion of people with recent Zika virus infection get GBS. Most people fully recover from GBS, but some have permanent damage. For more information, see Zika and GBS .  As more information becomes available, this travel notice will be updated. Please check back frequently for the most up-to-date recommendations.  What can travelers do to prevent Zika?  There is no vaccine or medicine for Zika. You can protect yourself by preventing mosquito bites:  Cover exposed skin by wearing long-sleeved shirts and long pants.  Use EPA-registered insect repellents containing DEET, picaridin, oil of lemon eucalyptus (OLE, also called para-menthane-diol [PMD]), IR3535, or 2-undecanone (methyl nonyl ketone). Always use as directed.  Pregnant and breastfeeding women can use all EPA-registered insect repellents, including DEET, according to the product label.  Most repellents, including DEET, can be used on children older than 2 months. (OLE should not be used on children younger than 3 years.)  Use permethrin-treated clothing and gear (such as boots, pants, socks, and tents). You can buy pre-treated clothing and gear or treat them yourself.  Stay in places with air conditioning and window and door screens to keep mosquitoes outside.  Sleep under a mosquito bed net if air conditioned or screened rooms are not available or if sleeping outdoors.  Mosquito netting can be used to cover babies younger than 2 months old in carriers, strollers, or cribs to protect them from mosquito bites.  Because Zika can be spread by sex, if you have sex ( vaginal, anal, or oral ) while traveling, you should use condoms.  After travel:  Many people infected with Zika virus do not feel sick. If a mosquito bites an infected person while the virus is still in that person&rsquo;s blood, it can spread the virus by biting another person. If you travel to Suriname, you should take steps to prevent mosquito bites for 3 weeks after your trip, even if you don&rsquo;t feel sick, so that you don&rsquo;t spread Zika to uninfected mosquitoes that can spread the virus to other people .  If you have visited Suriname who have a pregnant partner, you should either use condoms or not have sex during the pregnancy.  If you are thinking about pregnancy, talk with your health care provider and wait to become pregnant (see &ldquo; Women Trying to Become Pregnant &rdquo; for how long to wait). You also should use condoms after travel to protect your sex partners from Zika even if you are not pregnant or trying to become pregnant.  For more information, see Zika and Sexual Transmission .  If you feel sick and think you may have Zika:  Talk to your doctor if you develop a fever with a rash, joint pain, or red eyes. Tell him or her about your travel.  Take acetaminophen (paracetamol) to relieve fever and pain. Do not take aspirin, products containing aspirin, or other nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, such as ibuprofen.  Get lots of rest and drink plenty of liquids.  If you are pregnant:  Talk to a doctor or other health care provider after your trip, even if you don&#39;t feel sick. Pregnant travelers returning from Suriname, or who have had possible sexual exposure, should be offered testing for Zika virus infection.  If you develop a fever with a rash, joint pain, or red eyes, talk to your doctor immediately and tell him or her about your travel or possible sexual exposure.  If you do not have symptoms, testing should be offered if you see a health care provider, up to 12 weeks after you return from travel or your last possible sexual exposure.  Clinician Information  All pregnant women should be assessed for Zika virus exposure at each prenatal care visit. Possible exposures to Zika virus that warrant testing include:  Travel to or residence in an area with a current Zika outbreak.  Sex ( vaginal, anal, or oral ) with a partner who has traveled to or resides in an area with a current Zika outbreak.  The type of testing recommended varies according to when a woman&rsquo;s last possible exposure occurred or when her symptoms began. For more information, please visit the clinical guidance for healthcare providers caring for pregnant women .  Clinical Guidance for Healthcare Providers Caring for Infants &amp; Children is also available.  Additional Resources  For Travelers:  Zika Travel Information  Avoid Bug Bites  Insect Repellent Use and Safety  For Clinicians:  Zika: Information for Health Care Providers  Protection against Mosquitoes, Ticks, &amp; Other Insects &amp; Arthropods  File Formats Help: How do I view different file formats (PDF, DOC, PPT, MPEG) on this site?  Adobe PDF file  Microsoft PowerPoint file  Microsoft Word file  Microsoft Excel file  Audio/Video file  Apple Quicktime file  RealPlayer file  Text file  Zip Archive file  SAS file  ePub file  Page created: November 12, 2015  Page last updated: March 10, 2017  Page last reviewed: March 10, 2017  Content source:  Centers for Disease Control and Prevention  National Center for Emerging and Zoonotic Infectious Diseases (NCEZID)  Division of Global Migration and Quarantine (DGMQ)  Follow CDC  Email  Recommend  Tweet  Post  RSS  CDC Media  Listen  Watch  eCards  YouTube  About CDC  Employment  Newsroom  Training/Education  Funding  CDC's Organization  Mission and Vision  Using this Site  Legal  Link to Us  Policies  FOIA  Accessibility  Privacy  No FEAR Act  Inspector General  USA.gov  Contact CDC  Centers for Disease Control and Prevention  1600 Clifton Road  Atlanta ,  GA  30329-4027  USA  800-CDC-INFO (800-232-4636)  Contact CDC-INFO  TOP", "Zika Virus in Barbados - Alert - Level 2, Practice Enhanced Precautions - Travel Health Notices | Travelers&#39; Health | CDC  Skip directly to search  Skip directly to A to Z list  Skip directly to page options  Skip directly to site content  Start of Search Controls  Search Form Controls  Cancel  Submit  Search The CDC  CDC A-Z Index  MENU  CDC A-Z  SEARCH  A  B  C  D  E  F  G  H  I  J  K  L  M  N  O  P  Q  R  S  T  U  V  W  X  Y  Z  #  Search Form Controls  Search The CDC  submit  Start of Search Controls  Search Form Controls  Travelers' Health  Note: Javascript is disabled or is not supported by your browser. For this reason, some items on this page will be unavailable. For more information about this message, please visit this page: About CDC.gov .  Home Destinations Travel Notices Zika Virus in Barbados Zika Travel Information World Map of Zika Questions and Answers: Zika risk at high elevations Guidelines for US Citizens and Residents Living in Areas with Zika Guidelines for Travelers Visiting Friends and Family in Areas with Chikungunya, Dengue, or Zika Viajeros que visitan amigos y familiares en \u00e1reas con chikungu\u00f1a, dengue o zika Visiting Friends or Family in an Area with Zika? Find a Clinic Yellow Fever Vaccination Clinics FAQ Stamaril clinics Disease Directory Resources Resources for Travelers Adventure Travel Animal Safety Blood Clots Bug Bites Business Travel Cold Climates Counterfeit Drugs Cruise Ship Travel Families with Children Fish Poisoning in Travelers Food and Water Getting Health Care Abroad Getting Sick After Travel High Altitudes Hot Climates Humanitarian Aid Workers Humanitarian Aid Workers in Ecuador Insurance International Adoption Jet Lag Last-Minute Travel Long-Term Travel Mass Gatherings Medical Tourism Mental Health Motion Sickness Natural Disasters Pregnant Travelers Road Safety Senior Citizens Sex Tourism STDs Sun Exposure Swimming and Diving Study Abroad Tick Bites Travelers' Diarrhea Travelers with Chronic Illnesses Travelers with a Disability Travelers with Weakened Immune Systems Traveling with Your Pet Visiting Friends or Relatives Water Disinfection Infographics for Travelers MERS Health Advisory poster Food and Water: What's Safer Health Advisory: MERS Pictograms Risky vs. Safer Food and Water: What to Know Website Guide Infographics: Prevent Bug Bites Ebola Outbreak - Recently in West Africa? Ebola Outbreak - Going to West Africa? Zika Infographic: Inbound and Outbound Travelers Zika Infographic: Outbound Travelers Zika Infographic: Inbound Travelers Zika infographic: Enjoy Your Vacation Pack smart to prevent Zika Prevent Zika after travel Traveler Survival Guide Learn About Destination See a Doctor Pre-Travel Appointment Your Health Status How Diseases Spread Pack Smart Plan Ahead Sick While Traveling Know and Share Info Traveler Registration During Trip After Your Trip CDC-TV Videos Resources For Clinicians In-Clinic Quick Links Clinician Updates Clinical Updates CE Courses and Training Presentations for Health Professionals Yellow Fever Vaccine Course About the Yellow Fever Vaccine Course Continuing Education (CE) Credit for Yellow Fever Vaccine Course Travel Medicine References: Books, Journals, Articles & Websites Resources for the Travel Industry Yellow Book Contents Chapter 1 Introduction to Travel Health & the Yellow Book Planning for Healthy Travel: CDC Travelers' Health Website and Mobile Applications Travel Epidemiology Perspectives: Why Guidelines Differ Air Travel Trends Tables Maps Figures Boxes Updates About the Yellow Book In Memoriam: A Tribute to Alan J. Magill Partners GeoSentinel Global TravEpiNet Mobile Apps RSS Feeds  Zika Virus in Barbados  Recommend on Facebook  Tweet  Share Compartir  Warning - Level 3, Avoid Nonessential Travel  Alert - Level 2, Practice Enhanced Precautions  Watch - Level 1, Practice Usual Precautions  Language:  Select  Espa&ntilde;ol  What is the current situation?  Public health officials have reported that mosquitoes in Barbados are infected with Zika virus and are spreading it to people.  Because Zika virus is primarily spread by mosquitoes, CDC recommends that travelers to Barbados protect themselves from mosquito bites .  Zika Virus in Pregnancy  A pregnant woman can pass Zika virus to her fetus. Infection during pregnancy can cause serious birth defects. CDC recommends special precautions for the following groups:  Women who are pregnant:  Should not travel to Barbados.  If you must travel, talk to your doctor first and strictly follow steps to prevent mosquito bites during your trip.  Because Zika can also be spread by sex, if you have a partner who lives in or has traveled to Barbados, either use condoms or do not have sex ( vaginal, anal, or oral ) or share sex toys during your pregnancy.  Women who are trying to become pregnant:  Before you or your partner travel, talk to your doctor about your plans to become pregnant and the risk of Zika virus infection.  See CDC guidance for how long you should wait to get pregnant after travel to Barbados.  You and your partner should strictly follow steps to prevent mosquito bites .  If you have traveled to Barbados and have a pregnant partner, use condoms or don&rsquo;t have sex (vaginal, anal, or oral) or share sex toys during the pregnancy.  Sexual transmission of Zika virus is also possible, so you should use condoms or not have sex during your trip.  Many people infected with Zika virus do not get sick. Among those who do develop symptoms, sickness is usually mild, with symptoms that last for several days to a week. Guillain-Barr&eacute; syndrome (GBS) is a rare disorder that can cause muscle weakness and paralysis for a few weeks to several months. CDC research suggests that GBS is strongly associated with Zika; however, only a small proportion of people with recent Zika virus infection get GBS. Most people fully recover from GBS, but some have permanent damage. For more information, see Zika and GBS .  As more information becomes available, this travel notice will be updated. Please check back frequently for the most up-to-date recommendations.  What can travelers do to prevent Zika?  There is no vaccine or medicine for Zika. You can protect yourself by preventing mosquito bites:  Cover exposed skin by wearing long-sleeved shirts and long pants.  Use EPA-registered insect repellents containing DEET, picaridin, oil of lemon eucalyptus (OLE, also called para-menthane-diol [PMD]), IR3535, or 2-undecanone (methyl nonyl ketone). Always use as directed.  Pregnant and breastfeeding women can use all EPA-registered insect repellents, including DEET, according to the product label.  Most repellents, including DEET, can be used on children older than 2 months. (OLE should not be used on children younger than 3 years.)  Use permethrin-treated clothing and gear (such as boots, pants, socks, and tents). You can buy pre-treated clothing and gear or treat them yourself.  Stay in places with air conditioning and window and door screens to keep mosquitoes outside.  Sleep under a mosquito bed net if air conditioned or screened rooms are not available or if sleeping outdoors.  Mosquito netting can be used to cover babies younger than 2 months old in carriers, strollers, or cribs to protect them from mosquito bites.  Because Zika can be spread by sex, if you have sex ( vaginal, anal, or oral ) while traveling, you should use condoms.  After travel:  Many people infected with Zika virus do not feel sick. If a mosquito bites an infected person while the virus is still in that person&rsquo;s blood, it can spread the virus by biting another person. If you travel to Barbados, you should take steps to prevent mosquito bites for 3 weeks after your trip, even if you don&rsquo;t feel sick, so that you don&rsquo;t spread Zika to uninfected mosquitoes that can spread the virus to other people .  If you have visited Barbados and have a pregnant partner, you should either use condoms or not have sex during the pregnancy.  If you are thinking about pregnancy, talk with your health care provider and wait to become pregnant (see &ldquo; Women Trying to Become Pregnant &rdquo; for how long to wait). You also should use condoms after travel to protect your sex partners from Zika even if you are not pregnant or trying to become pregnant.  For more information, see Zika and Sexual Transmission .  If you feel sick and think you may have Zika:  Talk to your doctor if you develop a fever with a rash, joint pain, or red eyes. Tell him or her about your travel.  Take acetaminophen (paracetamol) to relieve fever and pain. Do not take aspirin, products containing aspirin, or other nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, such as ibuprofen.  Get lots of rest and drink plenty of liquids.  If you are pregnant:  Talk to a doctor or other health care provider after your trip, even if you don&#39;t feel sick. Pregnant travelers returning from Barbados, or who have had possible sexual exposure, should be offered testing for Zika virus infection.  If you develop a fever with a rash, joint pain, or red eyes, talk to your doctor immediately and tell him or her about your travel or possible sexual exposure.  If you do not have symptoms, testing should be offered if you see a health care provider, up to 12 weeks after you return from travel or your last possible sexual exposure.  Clinician Information  All pregnant women should be assessed for Zika virus exposure at each prenatal care visit. Possible exposures to Zika virus that warrant testing include:  Travel to or residence in an area with a current Zika outbreak.  Sex ( vaginal, anal, or oral ) with a partner who has traveled to or resides in an area with a current Zika outbreak.  The type of testing recommended varies according to when a woman&rsquo;s last possible exposure occurred or when her symptoms began. For more information, please visit the clinical guidance for healthcare providers caring for pregnant women .  Clinical Guidance for Healthcare Providers Caring for Infants &amp; Children is also available.  Additional Resources  For Travelers:  Zika Travel Information  Avoid Bug Bites  Insect Repellent Use and Safety  For Clinicians:  Zika: Information for Health Care Providers  Protection against Mosquitoes, Ticks, &amp; Other Insects &amp; Arthropods  File Formats Help: How do I view different file formats (PDF, DOC, PPT, MPEG) on this site?  Adobe PDF file  Microsoft PowerPoint file  Microsoft Word file  Microsoft Excel file  Audio/Video file  Apple Quicktime file  RealPlayer file  Text file  Zip Archive file  SAS file  ePub file  Page created: January 22, 2016  Page last updated: March 10, 2017  Page last reviewed: March 10, 2017  Content source:  Centers for Disease Control and Prevention  National Center for Emerging and Zoonotic Infectious Diseases (NCEZID)  Division of Global Migration and Quarantine (DGMQ)  Follow CDC  Email  Recommend  Tweet  Post  RSS  CDC Media  Listen  Watch  eCards  YouTube  About CDC  Employment  Newsroom  Training/Education  Funding  CDC's Organization  Mission and Vision  Using this Site  Legal  Link to Us  Policies  FOIA  Accessibility  Privacy  No FEAR Act  Inspector General  USA.gov  Contact CDC  Centers for Disease Control and Prevention  1600 Clifton Road  Atlanta ,  GA  30329-4027  USA  800-CDC-INFO (800-232-4636)  Contact CDC-INFO  TOP", "Zika Virus in Sint Eustatius - Alert - Level 2, Practice Enhanced Precautions - Travel Health Notices | Travelers&#39; Health | CDC  Skip directly to search  Skip directly to A to Z list  Skip directly to page options  Skip directly to site content  Start of Search Controls  Search Form Controls  Cancel  Submit  Search The CDC  CDC A-Z Index  MENU  CDC A-Z  SEARCH  A  B  C  D  E  F  G  H  I  J  K  L  M  N  O  P  Q  R  S  T  U  V  W  X  Y  Z  #  Search Form Controls  Search The CDC  submit  Start of Search Controls  Search Form Controls  Travelers' Health  Note: Javascript is disabled or is not supported by your browser. For this reason, some items on this page will be unavailable. For more information about this message, please visit this page: About CDC.gov .  Home Destinations Travel Notices Zika Virus in Sint Eustatius Zika Travel Information World Map of Zika Questions and Answers: Zika risk at high elevations Guidelines for US Citizens and Residents Living in Areas with Zika Guidelines for Travelers Visiting Friends and Family in Areas with Chikungunya, Dengue, or Zika Viajeros que visitan amigos y familiares en \u00e1reas con chikungu\u00f1a, dengue o zika Visiting Friends or Family in an Area with Zika? Find a Clinic Yellow Fever Vaccination Clinics FAQ Stamaril clinics Disease Directory Resources Resources for Travelers Adventure Travel Animal Safety Blood Clots Bug Bites Business Travel Cold Climates Counterfeit Drugs Cruise Ship Travel Families with Children Fish Poisoning in Travelers Food and Water Getting Health Care Abroad Getting Sick After Travel High Altitudes Hot Climates Humanitarian Aid Workers Humanitarian Aid Workers in Ecuador Insurance International Adoption Jet Lag Last-Minute Travel Long-Term Travel Mass Gatherings Medical Tourism Mental Health Motion Sickness Natural Disasters Pregnant Travelers Road Safety Senior Citizens Sex Tourism STDs Sun Exposure Swimming and Diving Study Abroad Tick Bites Travelers' Diarrhea Travelers with Chronic Illnesses Travelers with a Disability Travelers with Weakened Immune Systems Traveling with Your Pet Visiting Friends or Relatives Water Disinfection Infographics for Travelers MERS Health Advisory poster Food and Water: What's Safer Health Advisory: MERS Pictograms Risky vs. Safer Food and Water: What to Know Website Guide Infographics: Prevent Bug Bites Ebola Outbreak - Recently in West Africa? Ebola Outbreak - Going to West Africa? Zika Infographic: Inbound and Outbound Travelers Zika Infographic: Outbound Travelers Zika Infographic: Inbound Travelers Zika infographic: Enjoy Your Vacation Pack smart to prevent Zika Prevent Zika after travel Traveler Survival Guide Learn About Destination See a Doctor Pre-Travel Appointment Your Health Status How Diseases Spread Pack Smart Plan Ahead Sick While Traveling Know and Share Info Traveler Registration During Trip After Your Trip CDC-TV Videos Resources For Clinicians In-Clinic Quick Links Clinician Updates Clinical Updates CE Courses and Training Presentations for Health Professionals Yellow Fever Vaccine Course About the Yellow Fever Vaccine Course Continuing Education (CE) Credit for Yellow Fever Vaccine Course Travel Medicine References: Books, Journals, Articles & Websites Resources for the Travel Industry Yellow Book Contents Chapter 1 Introduction to Travel Health & the Yellow Book Planning for Healthy Travel: CDC Travelers' Health Website and Mobile Applications Travel Epidemiology Perspectives: Why Guidelines Differ Air Travel Trends Tables Maps Figures Boxes Updates About the Yellow Book In Memoriam: A Tribute to Alan J. Magill Partners GeoSentinel Global TravEpiNet Mobile Apps RSS Feeds  Zika Virus in Sint Eustatius  Recommend on Facebook  Tweet  Share Compartir  Warning - Level 3, Avoid Nonessential Travel  Alert - Level 2, Practice Enhanced Precautions  Watch - Level 1, Practice Usual Precautions  Language:  Select  Espa&ntilde;ol  What is the current situation?  Public health officials have reported that mosquitoes in Sint Eustatius are infected with Zika virus and are spreading it to people.  Because Zika virus is primarily spread by mosquitoes, CDC recommends that travelers to Sint Eustatius protect themselves from mosquito bites .  Zika Virus in Pregnancy  A pregnant woman can pass Zika virus to her fetus. Infection during pregnancy can cause serious birth defects. CDC recommends special precautions for the following groups:  Women who are pregnant:  Should not travel to Sint Eustatius.  If you must travel, talk to your doctor first and strictly follow steps to prevent mosquito bites during your trip.  Because Zika can also be spread by sex, if you have a partner who lives in or has traveled to Sint Eustatius, either use condoms or do not have sex ( vaginal, anal, or oral ) or share sex toys during your pregnancy.  Women who are trying to become pregnant:  Before you or your partner travel, talk to your doctor about your plans to become pregnant and the risk of Zika virus infection.  See CDC guidance for how long you should wait to get pregnant after travel to Sint Eustatius.  You and your partner should strictly follow steps to prevent mosquito bites .  If you have traveled to Sint Eustatius and have a pregnant partner, use condoms or don&rsquo;t have sex (vaginal, anal, or oral) or share sex toys during the pregnancy.  Sexual transmission of Zika virus is also possible, so you should use condoms or not have sex during your trip.  Many people infected with Zika virus do not get sick. Among those who do develop symptoms, sickness is usually mild, with symptoms that last for several days to a week. Guillain-Barr&eacute; syndrome (GBS) is a rare disorder that can cause muscle weakness and paralysis for a few weeks to several months. CDC research suggests that GBS is strongly associated with Zika; however, only a small proportion of people with recent Zika virus infection get GBS. Most people fully recover from GBS, but some have permanent damage. For more information, see Zika and GBS .  As more information becomes available, this travel notice will be updated. Please check back frequently for the most up-to-date recommendations.  What can travelers do to prevent Zika?  There is no vaccine or medicine for Zika. You can protect yourself by preventing mosquito bites:  Cover exposed skin by wearing long-sleeved shirts and long pants.  Use EPA-registered insect repellents containing DEET, picaridin, oil of lemon eucalyptus (OLE, also called para-menthane-diol [PMD]), IR3535, or 2-undecanone (methyl nonyl ketone). Always use as directed.  Pregnant and breastfeeding women can use all EPA-registered insect repellents, including DEET, according to the product label.  Most repellents, including DEET, can be used on children older than 2 months. (OLE should not be used on children younger than 3 years.)  Use permethrin-treated clothing and gear (such as boots, pants, socks, and tents). You can buy pre-treated clothing and gear or treat them yourself.  Stay in places with air conditioning and window and door screens to keep mosquitoes outside.  Sleep under a mosquito bed net if air conditioned or screened rooms are not available or if sleeping outdoors.  Mosquito netting can be used to cover babies younger than 2 months old in carriers, strollers, or cribs to protect them from mosquito bites.  Because Zika can be spread by sex, if you have sex ( vaginal, anal, or oral ) while traveling, you should use condoms.  After travel:  Many people infected with Zika virus do not feel sick. If a mosquito bites an infected person while the virus is still in that person&rsquo;s blood, it can spread the virus by biting another person. If you travel to Sint Eustatius, you should take steps to prevent mosquito bites for 3 weeks after your trip, even if you don&rsquo;t feel sick, so that you don&rsquo;t spread Zika to uninfected mosquitoes that can spread the virus to other people .  If you have visited Sint Eustatius and have a pregnant partner, you should either use condoms or not have sex during the pregnancy.  If you are thinking about pregnancy, talk with your health care provider and wait to become pregnant (see &ldquo; Women Trying to Become Pregnant &rdquo; for how long to wait). You also should use condoms after travel to protect your sex partners from Zika even if you are not pregnant or trying to become pregnant.  For more information, see Zika and Sexual Transmission .  If you feel sick and think you may have Zika:  Talk to your doctor if you develop a fever with a rash, joint pain, or red eyes. Tell him or her about your travel.  Take acetaminophen (paracetamol) to relieve fever and pain. Do not take aspirin, products containing aspirin, or other nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, such as ibuprofen.  Get lots of rest and drink plenty of liquids.  If you are pregnant:  Talk to a doctor or other health care provider after your trip, even if you don&#39;t feel sick. Pregnant travelers returning from Sint Eustatius, or who have had possible sexual exposure, should be offered testing for Zika virus infection.  If you develop a fever with a rash, joint pain, or red eyes, talk to your doctor immediately and tell him or her about your travel or possible sexual exposure.  If you do not have symptoms, testing should be offered if you see a health care provider, up to 12 weeks after you return from travel or your last possible sexual exposure.  Clinician Information  All pregnant women should be assessed for Zika virus exposure at each prenatal care visit. Possible exposures to Zika virus that warrant testing include:  Travel to or residence in an area with a current Zika outbreak.  Sex ( vaginal, anal, or oral ) with a partner who has traveled to or resides in an area with a current Zika outbreak.  The type of testing recommended varies according to when a woman&rsquo;s last possible exposure occurred or when her symptoms began. For more information, please visit the clinical guidance for healthcare providers caring for pregnant women .  Clinical Guidance for Healthcare Providers Caring for Infants &amp; Children is also available.  Additional Resources  For Travelers:  Zika Travel Information  Avoid Bug Bites  Insect Repellent Use and Safety  For Clinicians:  Zika: Information for Health Care Providers  Protection against Mosquitoes, Ticks, &amp; Other Insects &amp; Arthropods  File Formats Help: How do I view different file formats (PDF, DOC, PPT, MPEG) on this site?  Adobe PDF file  Microsoft PowerPoint file  Microsoft Word file  Microsoft Excel file  Audio/Video file  Apple Quicktime file  RealPlayer file  Text file  Zip Archive file  SAS file  ePub file  Page created: July 14, 2016  Page last updated: March 10, 2017  Page last reviewed: March 10, 2017  Content source:  Centers for Disease Control and Prevention  National Center for Emerging and Zoonotic Infectious Diseases (NCEZID)  Division of Global Migration and Quarantine (DGMQ)  Follow CDC  Email  Recommend  Tweet  Post  RSS  CDC Media  Listen  Watch  eCards  YouTube  About CDC  Employment  Newsroom  Training/Education  Funding  CDC's Organization  Mission and Vision  Using this Site  Legal  Link to Us  Policies  FOIA  Accessibility  Privacy  No FEAR Act  Inspector General  USA.gov  Contact CDC  Centers for Disease Control and Prevention  1600 Clifton Road  Atlanta ,  GA  30329-4027  USA  800-CDC-INFO (800-232-4636)  Contact CDC-INFO  TOP", "Zika Virus in French Guiana - Alert - Level 2, Practice Enhanced Precautions - Travel Health Notices | Travelers&#39; Health | CDC  Skip directly to search  Skip directly to A to Z list  Skip directly to page options  Skip directly to site content  Start of Search Controls  Search Form Controls  Cancel  Submit  Search The CDC  CDC A-Z Index  MENU  CDC A-Z  SEARCH  A  B  C  D  E  F  G  H  I  J  K  L  M  N  O  P  Q  R  S  T  U  V  W  X  Y  Z  #  Search Form Controls  Search The CDC  submit  Start of Search Controls  Search Form Controls  Travelers' Health  Note: Javascript is disabled or is not supported by your browser. For this reason, some items on this page will be unavailable. For more information about this message, please visit this page: About CDC.gov .  Home Destinations Travel Notices Zika Virus in French Guiana Zika Travel Information World Map of Zika Questions and Answers: Zika risk at high elevations Guidelines for US Citizens and Residents Living in Areas with Zika Guidelines for Travelers Visiting Friends and Family in Areas with Chikungunya, Dengue, or Zika Viajeros que visitan amigos y familiares en \u00e1reas con chikungu\u00f1a, dengue o zika Visiting Friends or Family in an Area with Zika? Find a Clinic Yellow Fever Vaccination Clinics FAQ Stamaril clinics Disease Directory Resources Resources for Travelers Adventure Travel Animal Safety Blood Clots Bug Bites Business Travel Cold Climates Counterfeit Drugs Cruise Ship Travel Families with Children Fish Poisoning in Travelers Food and Water Getting Health Care Abroad Getting Sick After Travel High Altitudes Hot Climates Humanitarian Aid Workers Humanitarian Aid Workers in Ecuador Insurance International Adoption Jet Lag Last-Minute Travel Long-Term Travel Mass Gatherings Medical Tourism Mental Health Motion Sickness Natural Disasters Pregnant Travelers Road Safety Senior Citizens Sex Tourism STDs Sun Exposure Swimming and Diving Study Abroad Tick Bites Travelers' Diarrhea Travelers with Chronic Illnesses Travelers with a Disability Travelers with Weakened Immune Systems Traveling with Your Pet Visiting Friends or Relatives Water Disinfection Infographics for Travelers MERS Health Advisory poster Food and Water: What's Safer Health Advisory: MERS Pictograms Risky vs. Safer Food and Water: What to Know Website Guide Infographics: Prevent Bug Bites Ebola Outbreak - Recently in West Africa? Ebola Outbreak - Going to West Africa? Zika Infographic: Inbound and Outbound Travelers Zika Infographic: Outbound Travelers Zika Infographic: Inbound Travelers Zika infographic: Enjoy Your Vacation Pack smart to prevent Zika Prevent Zika after travel Traveler Survival Guide Learn About Destination See a Doctor Pre-Travel Appointment Your Health Status How Diseases Spread Pack Smart Plan Ahead Sick While Traveling Know and Share Info Traveler Registration During Trip After Your Trip CDC-TV Videos Resources For Clinicians In-Clinic Quick Links Clinician Updates Clinical Updates CE Courses and Training Presentations for Health Professionals Yellow Fever Vaccine Course About the Yellow Fever Vaccine Course Continuing Education (CE) Credit for Yellow Fever Vaccine Course Travel Medicine References: Books, Journals, Articles & Websites Resources for the Travel Industry Yellow Book Contents Chapter 1 Introduction to Travel Health & the Yellow Book Planning for Healthy Travel: CDC Travelers' Health Website and Mobile Applications Travel Epidemiology Perspectives: Why Guidelines Differ Air Travel Trends Tables Maps Figures Boxes Updates About the Yellow Book In Memoriam: A Tribute to Alan J. Magill Partners GeoSentinel Global TravEpiNet Mobile Apps RSS Feeds  Zika Virus in French Guiana  Recommend on Facebook  Tweet  Share Compartir  Warning - Level 3, Avoid Nonessential Travel  Alert - Level 2, Practice Enhanced Precautions  Watch - Level 1, Practice Usual Precautions  Language:  Select  Espa&ntilde;ol  What is the current situation?  Public health officials have reported that mosquitoes in French Guinea are infected with Zika virus and are spreading it to people.  Because Zika virus is primarily spread by mosquitoes, CDC recommends that travelers to French Guinea protect themselves from mosquito bites .  Zika Virus in Pregnancy  A pregnant woman can pass Zika virus to her fetus. Infection during pregnancy can cause serious birth defects. CDC recommends special precautions for the following groups:  Women who are pregnant:  Should not travel to French Guinea.  If you must travel, talk to your doctor first and strictly follow steps to prevent mosquito bites during your trip.  Because Zika can also be spread by sex, if you have a partner who lives in or has traveled to French Guinea, either use condoms or do not have sex ( vaginal, anal, or oral ) or share sex toys during your pregnancy.  Women who are trying to become pregnant:  Before you or your partner travel, talk to your doctor about your plans to become pregnant and the risk of Zika virus infection.  See CDC guidance for how long you should wait to get pregnant after travel to French Guinea.  You and your partner should strictly follow steps to prevent mosquito bites .  If you have traveled to French Guinea and have a pregnant partner, use condoms or don&rsquo;t have sex (vaginal, anal, or oral) or share sex toys during the pregnancy.  Sexual transmission of Zika virus is also possible, so you should use condoms or not have sex during your trip.  Many people infected with Zika virus do not get sick. Among those who do develop symptoms, sickness is usually mild, with symptoms that last for several days to a week. Guillain-Barr&eacute; syndrome (GBS) is a rare disorder that can cause muscle weakness and paralysis for a few weeks to several months. CDC research suggests that GBS is strongly associated with Zika; however, only a small proportion of people with recent Zika virus infection get GBS. Most people fully recover from GBS, but some have permanent damage. For more information, see Zika and GBS .  As more information becomes available, this travel notice will be updated. Please check back frequently for the most up-to-date recommendations.  What can travelers do to prevent Zika?  There is no vaccine or medicine for Zika. You can protect yourself by preventing mosquito bites:  Cover exposed skin by wearing long-sleeved shirts and long pants.  Use EPA-registered insect repellents containing DEET, picaridin, oil of lemon eucalyptus (OLE, also called para-menthane-diol [PMD]), IR3535, or 2-undecanone (methyl nonyl ketone). Always use as directed.  Pregnant and breastfeeding women can use all EPA-registered insect repellents, including DEET, according to the product label.  Most repellents, including DEET, can be used on children older than 2 months. (OLE should not be used on children younger than 3 years.)  Use permethrin-treated clothing and gear (such as boots, pants, socks, and tents). You can buy pre-treated clothing and gear or treat them yourself.  Stay in places with air conditioning and window and door screens to keep mosquitoes outside.  Sleep under a mosquito bed net if air conditioned or screened rooms are not available or if sleeping outdoors.  Mosquito netting can be used to cover babies younger than 2 months old in carriers, strollers, or cribs to protect them from mosquito bites.  Because Zika can be spread by sex, if you have sex ( vaginal, anal, or oral ) while traveling, you should use condoms.  After travel:  Many people infected with Zika virus do not feel sick. If a mosquito bites an infected person while the virus is still in that person&rsquo;s blood, it can spread the virus by biting another person. If you travel to French Guinea, you should take steps to prevent mosquito bites for 3 weeks after your trip, even if you don&rsquo;t feel sick, so that you don&rsquo;t spread Zika to uninfected mosquitoes that can spread the virus to other people .  If you have visited French Guinea and have a pregnant partner, you should either use condoms or not have sex during the pregnancy.  If you are thinking about pregnancy, talk with your health care provider and wait to become pregnant (see &ldquo; Women Trying to Become Pregnant &rdquo; for how long to wait). You also should use condoms after travel to protect your sex partners from Zika even if you are not pregnant or trying to become pregnant.  For more information, see Zika and Sexual Transmission .  If you feel sick and think you may have Zika:  Talk to your doctor if you develop a fever with a rash, joint pain, or red eyes. Tell him or her about your travel.  Take acetaminophen (paracetamol) to relieve fever and pain. Do not take aspirin, products containing aspirin, or other nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, such as ibuprofen.  Get lots of rest and drink plenty of liquids.  If you are pregnant:  Talk to a doctor or other health care provider after your trip, even if you don&#39;t feel sick. Pregnant travelers returning from French Guinea, or who have had possible sexual exposure, should be offered testing for Zika virus infection.  If you develop a fever with a rash, joint pain, or red eyes, talk to your doctor immediately and tell him or her about your travel or possible sexual exposure.  If you do not have symptoms, testing should be offered if you see a health care provider, up to 12 weeks after you return from travel or your last possible sexual exposure.  Clinician Information  All pregnant women should be assessed for Zika virus exposure at each prenatal care visit. Possible exposures to Zika virus that warrant testing include:  Travel to or residence in an area with a current Zika outbreak.  Sex ( vaginal, anal, or oral ) with a partner who has traveled to or resides in an area with a current Zika outbreak.  The type of testing recommended varies according to when a woman&rsquo;s last possible exposure occurred or when her symptoms began. For more information, please visit the clinical guidance for healthcare providers caring for pregnant women .  Clinical Guidance for Healthcare Providers Caring for Infants &amp; Children is also available.  Additional Resources  For Travelers:  Zika Travel Information  Avoid Bug Bites  Insect Repellent Use and Safety  For Clinicians:  Zika: Information for Health Care Providers  Protection against Mosquitoes, Ticks, &amp; Other Insects &amp; Arthropods  File Formats Help: How do I view different file formats (PDF, DOC, PPT, MPEG) on this site?  Adobe PDF file  Microsoft PowerPoint file  Microsoft Word file  Microsoft Excel file  Audio/Video file  Apple Quicktime file  RealPlayer file  Text file  Zip Archive file  SAS file  ePub file  Page created: December 18, 2015  Page last updated: March 10, 2017  Page last reviewed: March 10, 2017  Content source:  Centers for Disease Control and Prevention  National Center for Emerging and Zoonotic Infectious Diseases (NCEZID)  Division of Global Migration and Quarantine (DGMQ)  Follow CDC  Email  Recommend  Tweet  Post  RSS  CDC Media  Listen  Watch  eCards  YouTube  About CDC  Employment  Newsroom  Training/Education  Funding  CDC's Organization  Mission and Vision  Using this Site  Legal  Link to Us  Policies  FOIA  Accessibility  Privacy  No FEAR Act  Inspector General  USA.gov  Contact CDC  Centers for Disease Control and Prevention  1600 Clifton Road  Atlanta ,  GA  30329-4027  USA  800-CDC-INFO (800-232-4636)  Contact CDC-INFO  TOP", "Zika Virus in Costa Rica - Alert - Level 2, Practice Enhanced Precautions - Travel Health Notices | Travelers&#39; Health | CDC  Skip directly to search  Skip directly to A to Z list  Skip directly to page options  Skip directly to site content  Start of Search Controls  Search Form Controls  Cancel  Submit  Search The CDC  CDC A-Z Index  MENU  CDC A-Z  SEARCH  A  B  C  D  E  F  G  H  I  J  K  L  M  N  O  P  Q  R  S  T  U  V  W  X  Y  Z  #  Search Form Controls  Search The CDC  submit  Start of Search Controls  Search Form Controls  Travelers' Health  Note: Javascript is disabled or is not supported by your browser. For this reason, some items on this page will be unavailable. For more information about this message, please visit this page: About CDC.gov .  Home Destinations Travel Notices Zika Virus in Costa Rica Zika Travel Information World Map of Zika Questions and Answers: Zika risk at high elevations Guidelines for US Citizens and Residents Living in Areas with Zika Guidelines for Travelers Visiting Friends and Family in Areas with Chikungunya, Dengue, or Zika Viajeros que visitan amigos y familiares en \u00e1reas con chikungu\u00f1a, dengue o zika Visiting Friends or Family in an Area with Zika? Find a Clinic Yellow Fever Vaccination Clinics FAQ Stamaril clinics Disease Directory Resources Resources for Travelers Adventure Travel Animal Safety Blood Clots Bug Bites Business Travel Cold Climates Counterfeit Drugs Cruise Ship Travel Families with Children Fish Poisoning in Travelers Food and Water Getting Health Care Abroad Getting Sick After Travel High Altitudes Hot Climates Humanitarian Aid Workers Humanitarian Aid Workers in Ecuador Insurance International Adoption Jet Lag Last-Minute Travel Long-Term Travel Mass Gatherings Medical Tourism Mental Health Motion Sickness Natural Disasters Pregnant Travelers Road Safety Senior Citizens Sex Tourism STDs Sun Exposure Swimming and Diving Study Abroad Tick Bites Travelers' Diarrhea Travelers with Chronic Illnesses Travelers with a Disability Travelers with Weakened Immune Systems Traveling with Your Pet Visiting Friends or Relatives Water Disinfection Infographics for Travelers MERS Health Advisory poster Food and Water: What's Safer Health Advisory: MERS Pictograms Risky vs. Safer Food and Water: What to Know Website Guide Infographics: Prevent Bug Bites Ebola Outbreak - Recently in West Africa? Ebola Outbreak - Going to West Africa? Zika Infographic: Inbound and Outbound Travelers Zika Infographic: Outbound Travelers Zika Infographic: Inbound Travelers Zika infographic: Enjoy Your Vacation Pack smart to prevent Zika Prevent Zika after travel Traveler Survival Guide Learn About Destination See a Doctor Pre-Travel Appointment Your Health Status How Diseases Spread Pack Smart Plan Ahead Sick While Traveling Know and Share Info Traveler Registration During Trip After Your Trip CDC-TV Videos Resources For Clinicians In-Clinic Quick Links Clinician Updates Clinical Updates CE Courses and Training Presentations for Health Professionals Yellow Fever Vaccine Course About the Yellow Fever Vaccine Course Continuing Education (CE) Credit for Yellow Fever Vaccine Course Travel Medicine References: Books, Journals, Articles & Websites Resources for the Travel Industry Yellow Book Contents Chapter 1 Introduction to Travel Health & the Yellow Book Planning for Healthy Travel: CDC Travelers' Health Website and Mobile Applications Travel Epidemiology Perspectives: Why Guidelines Differ Air Travel Trends Tables Maps Figures Boxes Updates About the Yellow Book In Memoriam: A Tribute to Alan J. Magill Partners GeoSentinel Global TravEpiNet Mobile Apps RSS Feeds  Zika Virus in Costa Rica  Recommend on Facebook  Tweet  Share Compartir  Warning - Level 3, Avoid Nonessential Travel  Alert - Level 2, Practice Enhanced Precautions  Watch - Level 1, Practice Usual Precautions  Language:  Select  Espa&ntilde;ol  Note: This travel notice was updated on March 10, 2017, to include an interactive map of Zika risk.  What is the current situation?  Public health officials have reported that mosquitoes in Costa Rica are infected with Zika virus and are spreading it to people.  Because Zika virus is primarily spread by mosquitoes, CDC recommends that travelers to Costa Rica protect themselves from mosquito bites . The mosquitoes that spread Zika usually do not live at elevations above 6,500 feet (2,000 meters) because of environmental conditions. Travelers whose itineraries are limited to areas above this elevation are at minimal risk of getting Zika from a mosquito. The following map shows areas of Costa Rica above and below 6,500 feet.* For more information, see Questions and Answers: Zika risk at high elevations .  Interactive web map: Search for a place by name, or pan, zoom, and click on the map to display additional information.  Zika Risk Areas  Area with risk of Zika  Area with minimal risk of ZIka  No known Zika  Note: Zika risk is determined according to altitude (height above sea level). Mosquitoes that spread Zika usually do not live at high altitudes (above 6,500 feet or 2,000 meters). The risk of getting Zika from a mosquito at high altitudes is less than at low altitudes.  Zika Virus in Pregnancy  A pregnant woman can pass Zika virus to her fetus. Infection during pregnancy can cause serious birth defects. CDC recommends special precautions for the following groups:  Women who are pregnant:  Should not travel to any area of Costa Rica below 6,500 feet (see map).  If you must travel to one of these areas, talk to your doctor first and strictly follow steps to prevent mosquito bites during your trip. If your itinerary is limited entirely to areas above 6,500 feet, there is minimal risk of getting Zika from a mosquito.  Because Zika can also be spread by sex, if you have a partner who lives in or has traveled to Costa Rica, either use condoms or do not have sex ( vaginal, anal, or oral ) or share sex toys during your pregnancy.  Women who are trying to become pregnant:  Before you or your partner travel, talk to your doctor about your plans to become pregnant and the risk of Zika virus infection.  See CDC guidance for how long you should wait to get pregnant after travel to Costa Rica.  You and your partner should strictly follow steps to prevent mosquito bites .  If you have traveled to Costa Rica and have a pregnant partner, use condoms or don&rsquo;t have sex (vaginal, anal, or oral) or share sex toys during the pregnancy.  Sexual transmission of Zika virus is also possible, so you should use condoms or not have sex during your trip.  Many people infected with Zika virus do not get sick. Among those who do develop symptoms, sickness is usually mild, with symptoms that last for several days to a week. Guillain-Barr&eacute; syndrome (GBS) is a rare disorder that can cause muscle weakness and paralysis for a few weeks to several months. CDC research suggests that GBS is strongly associated with Zika; however, only a small proportion of people with recent Zika virus infection get GBS. Most people fully recover from GBS, but some have permanent damage. For more information, see Zika and GBS .  As more information becomes available, this travel notice will be updated. Please check back frequently for the most up-to-date recommendations.  What can travelers do to prevent Zika?  There is no vaccine or medicine for Zika. You can protect yourself by preventing mosquito bites:  Cover exposed skin by wearing long-sleeved shirts and long pants.  Use EPA-registered insect repellents containing DEET, picaridin, oil of lemon eucalyptus (OLE, also called para-menthane-diol [PMD]), IR3535, or 2-undecanone (methyl nonyl ketone). Always use as directed.  Pregnant and breastfeeding women can use all EPA-registered insect repellents, including DEET, according to the product label.  Most repellents, including DEET, can be used on children older than 2 months. (OLE should not be used on children younger than 3 years.)  Use permethrin-treated clothing and gear (such as boots, pants, socks, and tents). You can buy pre-treated clothing and gear or treat them yourself.  Stay in places with air conditioning and window and door screens to keep mosquitoes outside.  Sleep under a mosquito bed net if air conditioned or screened rooms are not available or if sleeping outdoors.  Mosquito netting can be used to cover babies younger than 2 months old in carriers, strollers, or cribs to protect them from mosquito bites.  Because Zika can be spread by sex, if you have sex ( vaginal, anal, or oral ) while traveling, you should use condoms.  After travel:  Many people infected with Zika virus do not feel sick. If a mosquito bites an infected person while the virus is still in that person&rsquo;s blood, it can spread the virus by biting another person. If you travel to Costa Rica, you should take steps to prevent mosquito bites for 3 weeks after your trip, even if you don&rsquo;t feel sick, so that you don&rsquo;t spread Zika to uninfected mosquitoes that can spread the virus to other people .  If you have visited Costa Rica and have a pregnant partner, you should either use condoms or not have sex during the pregnancy.  If you are thinking about pregnancy, talk with your health care provider and wait to become pregnant (see &ldquo; Women Trying to Become Pregnant &rdquo; for how long to wait). You also should use condoms after travel to protect your sex partners from Zika even if you are not pregnant or trying to become pregnant.  For more information, see Zika and Sexual Transmission .  If you feel sick and think you may have Zika:  Talk to your doctor if you develop a fever with a rash, joint pain, or red eyes. Tell him or her about your travel.  Take acetaminophen (paracetamol) to relieve fever and pain. Do not take aspirin, products containing aspirin, or other nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, such as ibuprofen.  Get lots of rest and drink plenty of liquids.  If you are pregnant:  Talk to a doctor or other health care provider after your trip, even if you don&#39;t feel sick. Pregnant travelers returning from Costa Rica, or who have had possible sexual exposure, should be offered testing for Zika virus infection.  If you develop a fever with a rash, joint pain, or red eyes, talk to your doctor immediately and tell him or her about your travel or possible sexual exposure.  If you do not have symptoms, testing should be offered if you see a health care provider, up to 12 weeks after you return from travel or your last possible sexual exposure.  Clinician Information  All pregnant women should be assessed for Zika virus exposure at each prenatal care visit. Possible exposures to Zika virus that warrant testing include:  Travel to or residence in an area with a current Zika outbreak.  Sex ( vaginal, anal, or oral ) with a partner who has traveled to or resides in an area with a current Zika outbreak.  The type of testing recommended varies according to when a woman&rsquo;s last possible exposure occurred or when her symptoms began. For more information, please visit the clinical guidance for healthcare providers caring for pregnant women .  Clinical Guidance for Healthcare Providers Caring for Infants &amp; Children is also available.  Additional Resources  For Travelers:  Zika Travel Information  Avoid Bug Bites  Insect Repellent Use and Safety  For Clinicians:  Zika: Information for Health Care Providers  Protection against Mosquitoes, Ticks, &amp; Other Insects &amp; Arthropods  File Formats Help: How do I view different file formats (PDF, DOC, PPT, MPEG) on this site?  Adobe PDF file  Microsoft PowerPoint file  Microsoft Word file  Microsoft Excel file  Audio/Video file  Apple Quicktime file  RealPlayer file  Text file  Zip Archive file  SAS file  ePub file  Page created: February 01, 2016  Page last updated: March 10, 2017  Page last reviewed: March 10, 2017  Content source:  Centers for Disease Control and Prevention  National Center for Emerging and Zoonotic Infectious Diseases (NCEZID)  Division of Global Migration and Quarantine (DGMQ)  Follow CDC  Email  Recommend  Tweet  Post  RSS  CDC Media  Listen  Watch  eCards  YouTube  About CDC  Employment  Newsroom  Training/Education  Funding  CDC's Organization  Mission and Vision  Using this Site  Legal  Link to Us  Policies  FOIA  Accessibility  Privacy  No FEAR Act  Inspector General  USA.gov  Contact CDC  Centers for Disease Control and Prevention  1600 Clifton Road  Atlanta ,  GA  30329-4027  USA  800-CDC-INFO (800-232-4636)  Contact CDC-INFO  TOP", "Measles in Germany - Watch - Level 1, Practice Usual Precautions - Travel Health Notices | Travelers&#39; Health | CDC  Skip directly to search  Skip directly to A to Z list  Skip directly to page options  Skip directly to site content  Start of Search Controls  Search Form Controls  Cancel  Submit  Search The CDC  CDC A-Z Index  MENU  CDC A-Z  SEARCH  A  B  C  D  E  F  G  H  I  J  K  L  M  N  O  P  Q  R  S  T  U  V  W  X  Y  Z  #  Search Form Controls  Search The CDC  submit  Start of Search Controls  Search Form Controls  Travelers' Health  Note: Javascript is disabled or is not supported by your browser. For this reason, some items on this page will be unavailable. For more information about this message, please visit this page: About CDC.gov .  Home Destinations Travel Notices Measles in Germany Zika Travel Information World Map of Zika Questions and Answers: Zika risk at high elevations Guidelines for US Citizens and Residents Living in Areas with Zika Guidelines for Travelers Visiting Friends and Family in Areas with Chikungunya, Dengue, or Zika Viajeros que visitan amigos y familiares en \u00e1reas con chikungu\u00f1a, dengue o zika Visiting Friends or Family in an Area with Zika? Find a Clinic Yellow Fever Vaccination Clinics FAQ Stamaril clinics Disease Directory Resources Resources for Travelers Adventure Travel Animal Safety Blood Clots Bug Bites Business Travel Cold Climates Counterfeit Drugs Cruise Ship Travel Families with Children Fish Poisoning in Travelers Food and Water Getting Health Care Abroad Getting Sick After Travel High Altitudes Hot Climates Humanitarian Aid Workers Humanitarian Aid Workers in Ecuador Insurance International Adoption Jet Lag Last-Minute Travel Long-Term Travel Mass Gatherings Medical Tourism Mental Health Motion Sickness Natural Disasters Pregnant Travelers Road Safety Senior Citizens Sex Tourism STDs Sun Exposure Swimming and Diving Study Abroad Tick Bites Travelers' Diarrhea Travelers with Chronic Illnesses Travelers with a Disability Travelers with Weakened Immune Systems Traveling with Your Pet Visiting Friends or Relatives Water Disinfection Infographics for Travelers MERS Health Advisory poster Food and Water: What's Safer Health Advisory: MERS Pictograms Risky vs. Safer Food and Water: What to Know Website Guide Infographics: Prevent Bug Bites Ebola Outbreak - Recently in West Africa? Ebola Outbreak - Going to West Africa? Zika Infographic: Inbound and Outbound Travelers Zika Infographic: Outbound Travelers Zika Infographic: Inbound Travelers Zika infographic: Enjoy Your Vacation Pack smart to prevent Zika Prevent Zika after travel Traveler Survival Guide Learn About Destination See a Doctor Pre-Travel Appointment Your Health Status How Diseases Spread Pack Smart Plan Ahead Sick While Traveling Know and Share Info Traveler Registration During Trip After Your Trip CDC-TV Videos Resources For Clinicians In-Clinic Quick Links Clinician Updates Clinical Updates CE Courses and Training Presentations for Health Professionals Yellow Fever Vaccine Course About the Yellow Fever Vaccine Course Continuing Education (CE) Credit for Yellow Fever Vaccine Course Travel Medicine References: Books, Journals, Articles & Websites Resources for the Travel Industry Yellow Book Contents Chapter 1 Introduction to Travel Health & the Yellow Book Planning for Healthy Travel: CDC Travelers' Health Website and Mobile Applications Travel Epidemiology Perspectives: Why Guidelines Differ Air Travel Trends Tables Maps Figures Boxes Updates About the Yellow Book In Memoriam: A Tribute to Alan J. Magill Partners GeoSentinel Global TravEpiNet Mobile Apps RSS Feeds  Measles in Germany  Recommend on Facebook  Tweet  Share Compartir  Warning - Level 3, Avoid Nonessential Travel  Alert - Level 2, Practice Enhanced Precautions  Watch - Level 1, Practice Usual Precautions  What is the current situation?  Health officials in Germany have reported an outbreak of measles.  CDC recommends that travelers to Germany protect themselves by making sure they are vaccinated against measles. Getting measles vaccine is particularly important for infants 6&ndash;11 months of age (1 dose of measles vaccine) and children 1 year of age or older (2 doses of measles vaccine). Clinicians should keep measles in mind when treating patients with fever and rash, especially if the patient has recently traveled internationally.  What can travelers do to protect themselves?  Get measles vaccine or make sure you have already been vaccinated.  Wash your hands often.  Avoid touching your mouth, nose, and eyes.  Learn more about preventing measles and what to do if you think you have it on the measles page for travelers.  Traveler Information  Measles Webpage for Travelers  CDC Measles Homepage  MMR Vaccine Information Statement  MMRV Vaccine Information Statement  Clinician Information  Measles (Rubeola) in CDC&rsquo;s Yellow Book  Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices (ACIP) Recommendations for MMR vaccine and MMRV vaccine  Measles Information for Healthcare Professionals  File Formats Help: How do I view different file formats (PDF, DOC, PPT, MPEG) on this site?  Adobe PDF file  Microsoft PowerPoint file  Microsoft Word file  Microsoft Excel file  Audio/Video file  Apple Quicktime file  RealPlayer file  Text file  Zip Archive file  SAS file  ePub file  Page created: April 17, 2017  Page last updated: April 17, 2017  Page last reviewed: April 17, 2017  Content source:  Centers for Disease Control and Prevention  National Center for Emerging and Zoonotic Infectious Diseases (NCEZID)  Division of Global Migration and Quarantine (DGMQ)  Follow CDC  Email  Recommend  Tweet  Post  RSS  CDC Media  Listen  Watch  eCards  YouTube  About CDC  Employment  Newsroom  Training/Education  Funding  CDC's Organization  Mission and Vision  Using this Site  Legal  Link to Us  Policies  FOIA  Accessibility  Privacy  No FEAR Act  Inspector General  USA.gov  Contact CDC  Centers for Disease Control and Prevention  1600 Clifton Road  Atlanta ,  GA  30329-4027  USA  800-CDC-INFO (800-232-4636)  Contact CDC-INFO  TOP", "Zika Virus in Paraguay - Alert - Level 2, Practice Enhanced Precautions - Travel Health Notices | Travelers&#39; Health | CDC  Skip directly to search  Skip directly to A to Z list  Skip directly to page options  Skip directly to site content  Start of Search Controls  Search Form Controls  Cancel  Submit  Search The CDC  CDC A-Z Index  MENU  CDC A-Z  SEARCH  A  B  C  D  E  F  G  H  I  J  K  L  M  N  O  P  Q  R  S  T  U  V  W  X  Y  Z  #  Search Form Controls  Search The CDC  submit  Start of Search Controls  Search Form Controls  Travelers' Health  Note: Javascript is disabled or is not supported by your browser. For this reason, some items on this page will be unavailable. For more information about this message, please visit this page: About CDC.gov .  Home Destinations Travel Notices Zika Virus in Paraguay Zika Travel Information World Map of Zika Questions and Answers: Zika risk at high elevations Guidelines for US Citizens and Residents Living in Areas with Zika Guidelines for Travelers Visiting Friends and Family in Areas with Chikungunya, Dengue, or Zika Viajeros que visitan amigos y familiares en \u00e1reas con chikungu\u00f1a, dengue o zika Visiting Friends or Family in an Area with Zika? Find a Clinic Yellow Fever Vaccination Clinics FAQ Stamaril clinics Disease Directory Resources Resources for Travelers Adventure Travel Animal Safety Blood Clots Bug Bites Business Travel Cold Climates Counterfeit Drugs Cruise Ship Travel Families with Children Fish Poisoning in Travelers Food and Water Getting Health Care Abroad Getting Sick After Travel High Altitudes Hot Climates Humanitarian Aid Workers Humanitarian Aid Workers in Ecuador Insurance International Adoption Jet Lag Last-Minute Travel Long-Term Travel Mass Gatherings Medical Tourism Mental Health Motion Sickness Natural Disasters Pregnant Travelers Road Safety Senior Citizens Sex Tourism STDs Sun Exposure Swimming and Diving Study Abroad Tick Bites Travelers' Diarrhea Travelers with Chronic Illnesses Travelers with a Disability Travelers with Weakened Immune Systems Traveling with Your Pet Visiting Friends or Relatives Water Disinfection Infographics for Travelers MERS Health Advisory poster Food and Water: What's Safer Health Advisory: MERS Pictograms Risky vs. Safer Food and Water: What to Know Website Guide Infographics: Prevent Bug Bites Ebola Outbreak - Recently in West Africa? Ebola Outbreak - Going to West Africa? Zika Infographic: Inbound and Outbound Travelers Zika Infographic: Outbound Travelers Zika Infographic: Inbound Travelers Zika infographic: Enjoy Your Vacation Pack smart to prevent Zika Prevent Zika after travel Traveler Survival Guide Learn About Destination See a Doctor Pre-Travel Appointment Your Health Status How Diseases Spread Pack Smart Plan Ahead Sick While Traveling Know and Share Info Traveler Registration During Trip After Your Trip CDC-TV Videos Resources For Clinicians In-Clinic Quick Links Clinician Updates Clinical Updates CE Courses and Training Presentations for Health Professionals Yellow Fever Vaccine Course About the Yellow Fever Vaccine Course Continuing Education (CE) Credit for Yellow Fever Vaccine Course Travel Medicine References: Books, Journals, Articles & Websites Resources for the Travel Industry Yellow Book Contents Chapter 1 Introduction to Travel Health & the Yellow Book Planning for Healthy Travel: CDC Travelers' Health Website and Mobile Applications Travel Epidemiology Perspectives: Why Guidelines Differ Air Travel Trends Tables Maps Figures Boxes Updates About the Yellow Book In Memoriam: A Tribute to Alan J. Magill Partners GeoSentinel Global TravEpiNet Mobile Apps RSS Feeds  Zika Virus in Paraguay  Recommend on Facebook  Tweet  Share Compartir  Warning - Level 3, Avoid Nonessential Travel  Alert - Level 2, Practice Enhanced Precautions  Watch - Level 1, Practice Usual Precautions  Language:  Select  Espa&ntilde;ol  What is the current situation?  Public health officials have reported that mosquitoes in Paraguay are infected with Zika virus and are spreading it to people.  Because Zika virus is primarily spread by mosquitoes, CDC recommends that travelers to Paraguay protect themselves from mosquito bites .  Zika Virus in Pregnancy  A pregnant woman can pass Zika virus to her fetus. Infection during pregnancy can cause serious birth defects. CDC recommends special precautions for the following groups:  Women who are pregnant:  Should not travel to Paraguay.  If you must travel, talk to your doctor first and strictly follow steps to prevent mosquito bites during your trip.  Because Zika can also be spread by sex, if you have a partner who lives in or has traveled to Paraguay, either use condoms or do not have sex ( vaginal, anal, or oral ) or share sex toys during your pregnancy.  Women who are trying to become pregnant:  Before you or your partner travel, talk to your doctor about your plans to become pregnant and the risk of Zika virus infection.  See CDC guidance for how long you should wait to get pregnant after travel to Paraguay.  You and your partner should strictly follow steps to prevent mosquito bites .  If you have traveled to Paraguay and have a pregnant partner, use condoms or don&rsquo;t have sex (vaginal, anal, or oral) or share sex toys during the pregnancy.  Sexual transmission of Zika virus is also possible, so you should use condoms or not have sex during your trip.  Many people infected with Zika virus do not get sick. Among those who do develop symptoms, sickness is usually mild, with symptoms that last for several days to a week. Guillain-Barr&eacute; syndrome (GBS) is a rare disorder that can cause muscle weakness and paralysis for a few weeks to several months. CDC research suggests that GBS is strongly associated with Zika; however, only a small proportion of people with recent Zika virus infection get GBS. Most people fully recover from GBS, but some have permanent damage. For more information, see Zika and GBS .  As more information becomes available, this travel notice will be updated. Please check back frequently for the most up-to-date recommendations.  What can travelers do to prevent Zika?  There is no vaccine or medicine for Zika. You can protect yourself by preventing mosquito bites:  Cover exposed skin by wearing long-sleeved shirts and long pants.  Use EPA-registered insect repellents containing DEET, picaridin, oil of lemon eucalyptus (OLE, also called para-menthane-diol [PMD]), IR3535, or 2-undecanone (methyl nonyl ketone). Always use as directed.  Pregnant and breastfeeding women can use all EPA-registered insect repellents, including DEET, according to the product label.  Most repellents, including DEET, can be used on children older than 2 months. (OLE should not be used on children younger than 3 years.)  Use permethrin-treated clothing and gear (such as boots, pants, socks, and tents). You can buy pre-treated clothing and gear or treat them yourself.  Stay in places with air conditioning and window and door screens to keep mosquitoes outside.  Sleep under a mosquito bed net if air conditioned or screened rooms are not available or if sleeping outdoors.  Mosquito netting can be used to cover babies younger than 2 months old in carriers, strollers, or cribs to protect them from mosquito bites.  Because Zika can be spread by sex, if you have sex ( vaginal, anal, or oral ) while traveling, you should use condoms.  After travel:  Many people infected with Zika virus do not feel sick. If a mosquito bites an infected person while the virus is still in that person&rsquo;s blood, it can spread the virus by biting another person. If you travel to Paraguay, you should take steps to prevent mosquito bites for 3 weeks after your trip, even if you don&rsquo;t feel sick, so that you don&rsquo;t spread Zika to uninfected mosquitoes that can spread the virus to other people .  If you have visited Paraguay and have a pregnant partner, you should either use condoms or not have sex during the pregnancy.  If you are thinking about pregnancy, talk with your health care provider and wait to become pregnant (see &ldquo; Women Trying to Become Pregnant &rdquo; for how long to wait). You also should use condoms after travel to protect your sex partners from Zika even if you are not pregnant or trying to become pregnant.  For more information, see Zika and Sexual Transmission .  If you feel sick and think you may have Zika:  Talk to your doctor if you develop a fever with a rash, joint pain, or red eyes. Tell him or her about your travel.  Take acetaminophen (paracetamol) to relieve fever and pain. Do not take aspirin, products containing aspirin, or other nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, such as ibuprofen.  Get lots of rest and drink plenty of liquids.  If you are pregnant:  Talk to a doctor or other health care provider after your trip, even if you don&#39;t feel sick. Pregnant travelers returning from Paraguay, or who have had possible sexual exposure, should be offered testing for Zika virus infection.  If you develop a fever with a rash, joint pain, or red eyes, talk to your doctor immediately and tell him or her about your travel or possible sexual exposure.  If you do not have symptoms, testing should be offered if you see a health care provider, up to 12 weeks after you return from travel or your last possible sexual exposure.  Clinician Information  All pregnant women should be assessed for Zika virus exposure at each prenatal care visit. Possible exposures to Zika virus that warrant testing include:  Travel to or residence in an area with a current Zika outbreak.  Sex ( vaginal, anal, or oral ) with a partner who has traveled to or resides in an area with a current Zika outbreak.  The type of testing recommended varies according to when a woman&rsquo;s last possible exposure occurred or when her symptoms began. For more information, please visit the clinical guidance for healthcare providers caring for pregnant women .  Clinical Guidance for Healthcare Providers Caring for Infants &amp; Children is also available.  Additional Resources  For Travelers:  Zika Travel Information  Avoid Bug Bites  Insect Repellent Use and Safety  For Clinicians:  Zika: Information for Health Care Providers  Protection against Mosquitoes, Ticks, &amp; Other Insects &amp; Arthropods  File Formats Help: How do I view different file formats (PDF, DOC, PPT, MPEG) on this site?  Adobe PDF file  Microsoft PowerPoint file  Microsoft Word file  Microsoft Excel file  Audio/Video file  Apple Quicktime file  RealPlayer file  Text file  Zip Archive file  SAS file  ePub file  Page created: December 10, 2015  Page last updated: March 10, 2017  Page last reviewed: March 10, 2017  Content source:  Centers for Disease Control and Prevention  National Center for Emerging and Zoonotic Infectious Diseases (NCEZID)  Division of Global Migration and Quarantine (DGMQ)  Follow CDC  Email  Recommend  Tweet  Post  RSS  CDC Media  Listen  Watch  eCards  YouTube  About CDC  Employment  Newsroom  Training/Education  Funding  CDC's Organization  Mission and Vision  Using this Site  Legal  Link to Us  Policies  FOIA  Accessibility  Privacy  No FEAR Act  Inspector General  USA.gov  Contact CDC  Centers for Disease Control and Prevention  1600 Clifton Road  Atlanta ,  GA  30329-4027  USA  800-CDC-INFO (800-232-4636)  Contact CDC-INFO  TOP", "Zika Virus in Saint Lucia - Alert - Level 2, Practice Enhanced Precautions - Travel Health Notices | Travelers&#39; Health | CDC  Skip directly to search  Skip directly to A to Z list  Skip directly to page options  Skip directly to site content  Start of Search Controls  Search Form Controls  Cancel  Submit  Search The CDC  CDC A-Z Index  MENU  CDC A-Z  SEARCH  A  B  C  D  E  F  G  H  I  J  K  L  M  N  O  P  Q  R  S  T  U  V  W  X  Y  Z  #  Search Form Controls  Search The CDC  submit  Start of Search Controls  Search Form Controls  Travelers' Health  Note: Javascript is disabled or is not supported by your browser. For this reason, some items on this page will be unavailable. For more information about this message, please visit this page: About CDC.gov .  Home Destinations Travel Notices Zika Virus in Saint Lucia Zika Travel Information World Map of Zika Questions and Answers: Zika risk at high elevations Guidelines for US Citizens and Residents Living in Areas with Zika Guidelines for Travelers Visiting Friends and Family in Areas with Chikungunya, Dengue, or Zika Viajeros que visitan amigos y familiares en \u00e1reas con chikungu\u00f1a, dengue o zika Visiting Friends or Family in an Area with Zika? Find a Clinic Yellow Fever Vaccination Clinics FAQ Stamaril clinics Disease Directory Resources Resources for Travelers Adventure Travel Animal Safety Blood Clots Bug Bites Business Travel Cold Climates Counterfeit Drugs Cruise Ship Travel Families with Children Fish Poisoning in Travelers Food and Water Getting Health Care Abroad Getting Sick After Travel High Altitudes Hot Climates Humanitarian Aid Workers Humanitarian Aid Workers in Ecuador Insurance International Adoption Jet Lag Last-Minute Travel Long-Term Travel Mass Gatherings Medical Tourism Mental Health Motion Sickness Natural Disasters Pregnant Travelers Road Safety Senior Citizens Sex Tourism STDs Sun Exposure Swimming and Diving Study Abroad Tick Bites Travelers' Diarrhea Travelers with Chronic Illnesses Travelers with a Disability Travelers with Weakened Immune Systems Traveling with Your Pet Visiting Friends or Relatives Water Disinfection Infographics for Travelers MERS Health Advisory poster Food and Water: What's Safer Health Advisory: MERS Pictograms Risky vs. Safer Food and Water: What to Know Website Guide Infographics: Prevent Bug Bites Ebola Outbreak - Recently in West Africa? Ebola Outbreak - Going to West Africa? Zika Infographic: Inbound and Outbound Travelers Zika Infographic: Outbound Travelers Zika Infographic: Inbound Travelers Zika infographic: Enjoy Your Vacation Pack smart to prevent Zika Prevent Zika after travel Traveler Survival Guide Learn About Destination See a Doctor Pre-Travel Appointment Your Health Status How Diseases Spread Pack Smart Plan Ahead Sick While Traveling Know and Share Info Traveler Registration During Trip After Your Trip CDC-TV Videos Resources For Clinicians In-Clinic Quick Links Clinician Updates Clinical Updates CE Courses and Training Presentations for Health Professionals Yellow Fever Vaccine Course About the Yellow Fever Vaccine Course Continuing Education (CE) Credit for Yellow Fever Vaccine Course Travel Medicine References: Books, Journals, Articles & Websites Resources for the Travel Industry Yellow Book Contents Chapter 1 Introduction to Travel Health & the Yellow Book Planning for Healthy Travel: CDC Travelers' Health Website and Mobile Applications Travel Epidemiology Perspectives: Why Guidelines Differ Air Travel Trends Tables Maps Figures Boxes Updates About the Yellow Book In Memoriam: A Tribute to Alan J. Magill Partners GeoSentinel Global TravEpiNet Mobile Apps RSS Feeds  Zika Virus in Saint Lucia  Recommend on Facebook  Tweet  Share Compartir  Warning - Level 3, Avoid Nonessential Travel  Alert - Level 2, Practice Enhanced Precautions  Watch - Level 1, Practice Usual Precautions  Language:  Select  Espa&ntilde;ol  What is the current situation?  Public health officials have reported that mosquitoes in Saint Lucia are infected with Zika virus and are spreading it to people.  Because Zika virus is primarily spread by mosquitoes, CDC recommends that travelers to Saint Lucia protect themselves from mosquito bites .  Zika Virus in Pregnancy  A pregnant woman can pass Zika virus to her fetus. Infection during pregnancy can cause serious birth defects. CDC recommends special precautions for the following groups:  Women who are pregnant:  Should not travel to Saint Lucia.  If you must travel, talk to your doctor first and strictly follow steps to prevent mosquito bites during your trip.  Because Zika can also be spread by sex, if you have a partner who lives in or has traveled to Saint Lucia, either use condoms or do not have sex ( vaginal, anal, or oral ) or share sex toys during your pregnancy.  Women who are trying to become pregnant:  Before you or your partner travel, talk to your doctor about your plans to become pregnant and the risk of Zika virus infection.  See CDC guidance for how long you should wait to get pregnant after travel to Saint Lucia.  You and your partner should strictly follow steps to prevent mosquito bites .  If you have traveled to Saint Lucia and have a pregnant partner, use condoms or don&rsquo;t have sex (vaginal, anal, or oral) or share sex toys during the pregnancy.  Sexual transmission of Zika virus is also possible, so you should use condoms or not have sex during your trip.  Many people infected with Zika virus do not get sick. Among those who do develop symptoms, sickness is usually mild, with symptoms that last for several days to a week. Guillain-Barr&eacute; syndrome (GBS) is a rare disorder that can cause muscle weakness and paralysis for a few weeks to several months. CDC research suggests that GBS is strongly associated with Zika; however, only a small proportion of people with recent Zika virus infection get GBS. Most people fully recover from GBS, but some have permanent damage. For more information, see Zika and GBS .  As more information becomes available, this travel notice will be updated. Please check back frequently for the most up-to-date recommendations.  What can travelers do to prevent Zika?  There is no vaccine or medicine for Zika. You can protect yourself by preventing mosquito bites:  Cover exposed skin by wearing long-sleeved shirts and long pants.  Use EPA-registered insect repellents containing DEET, picaridin, oil of lemon eucalyptus (OLE, also called para-menthane-diol [PMD]), IR3535, or 2-undecanone (methyl nonyl ketone). Always use as directed.  Pregnant and breastfeeding women can use all EPA-registered insect repellents, including DEET, according to the product label.  Most repellents, including DEET, can be used on children older than 2 months. (OLE should not be used on children younger than 3 years.)  Use permethrin-treated clothing and gear (such as boots, pants, socks, and tents). You can buy pre-treated clothing and gear or treat them yourself.  Stay in places with air conditioning and window and door screens to keep mosquitoes outside.  Sleep under a mosquito bed net if air conditioned or screened rooms are not available or if sleeping outdoors.  Mosquito netting can be used to cover babies younger than 2 months old in carriers, strollers, or cribs to protect them from mosquito bites.  Because Zika can be spread by sex, if you have sex ( vaginal, anal, or oral ) while traveling, you should use condoms.  After travel:  Many people infected with Zika virus do not feel sick. If a mosquito bites an infected person while the virus is still in that person&rsquo;s blood, it can spread the virus by biting another person. If you travel to Saint Lucia, you should take steps to prevent mosquito bites for 3 weeks after your trip, even if you don&rsquo;t feel sick, so that you don&rsquo;t spread Zika to uninfected mosquitoes that can spread the virus to other people .  If you have visited Saint Lucia and have a pregnant partner, you should either use condoms or not have sex during the pregnancy.  If you are thinking about pregnancy, talk with your health care provider and wait to become pregnant (see &ldquo; Women Trying to Become Pregnant &rdquo; for how long to wait). You also should use condoms after travel to protect your sex partners from Zika even if you are not pregnant or trying to become pregnant.  For more information, see Zika and Sexual Transmission .  If you feel sick and think you may have Zika:  Talk to your doctor if you develop a fever with a rash, joint pain, or red eyes. Tell him or her about your travel.  Take acetaminophen (paracetamol) to relieve fever and pain. Do not take aspirin, products containing aspirin, or other nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, such as ibuprofen.  Get lots of rest and drink plenty of liquids.  If you are pregnant:  Talk to a doctor or other health care provider after your trip, even if you don&#39;t feel sick. Pregnant travelers returning from Saint Lucia, or who have had possible sexual exposure, should be offered testing for Zika virus infection.  If you develop a fever with a rash, joint pain, or red eyes, talk to your doctor immediately and tell him or her about your travel or possible sexual exposure.  If you do not have symptoms, testing should be offered if you see a health care provider, up to 12 weeks after you return from travel or your last possible sexual exposure.  Clinician Information  All pregnant women should be assessed for Zika virus exposure at each prenatal care visit. Possible exposures to Zika virus that warrant testing include:  Travel to or residence in an area with a current Zika outbreak.  Sex ( vaginal, anal, or oral ) with a partner who has traveled to or resides in an area with a current Zika outbreak.  The type of testing recommended varies according to when a woman&rsquo;s last possible exposure occurred or when her symptoms began. For more information, please visit the clinical guidance for healthcare providers caring for pregnant women .  Clinical Guidance for Healthcare Providers Caring for Infants &amp; Children is also available.  Additional Resources  For Travelers:  Zika Travel Information  Avoid Bug Bites  Insect Repellent Use and Safety  For Clinicians:  Zika: Information for Health Care Providers  Protection against Mosquitoes, Ticks, &amp; Other Insects &amp; Arthropods  File Formats Help: How do I view different file formats (PDF, DOC, PPT, MPEG) on this site?  Adobe PDF file  Microsoft PowerPoint file  Microsoft Word file  Microsoft Excel file  Audio/Video file  Apple Quicktime file  RealPlayer file  Text file  Zip Archive file  SAS file  ePub file  Page created: April 13, 2016  Page last updated: March 10, 2017  Page last reviewed: March 10, 2017  Content source:  Centers for Disease Control and Prevention  National Center for Emerging and Zoonotic Infectious Diseases (NCEZID)  Division of Global Migration and Quarantine (DGMQ)  Follow CDC  Email  Recommend  Tweet  Post  RSS  CDC Media  Listen  Watch  eCards  YouTube  About CDC  Employment  Newsroom  Training/Education  Funding  CDC's Organization  Mission and Vision  Using this Site  Legal  Link to Us  Policies  FOIA  Accessibility  Privacy  No FEAR Act  Inspector General  USA.gov  Contact CDC  Centers for Disease Control and Prevention  1600 Clifton Road  Atlanta ,  GA  30329-4027  USA  800-CDC-INFO (800-232-4636)  Contact CDC-INFO  TOP", "AVIAN INFLUENZA, HUMAN (53): CHINA, H7N9 **************************************** A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases In this Update: [1] Poultry Market Closures [2] Jiangsu [3] Hebei [4] Shandong [5] Sichuan ****** [1] Poultry Market Closures Date: Sun 21 May 2017, 0:53 AM Source: VOA News [edited] China will shutter poultry markets in a district of southwestern Sichuan province after a man fell ill with the H7N9 bird flu, state-owned China News Service reported [Sun 21 May 2017]. The 44-year-old man sold live poultry at a farmers market, China News reported, citing officials in Zigong city. Poultry markets in Zigong's Ziliujing district will be closed starting from midnight [Mon 22 May 2017], the report said. Cases of bird flu have been unusually high for China since last year [2016], with 3 times more fatalities from H7N9 in the 1st 4 months of the year than in all of 2016, although deaths fell in April [2017] for the 3rd consecutive month. -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail ****** [2] Jiangsu Date: Sat 20 May 2017 Source: FIC (Flu Information Centre/Flu in China) [edited] Jiangsu province reported two new human H7N9 AIV cases from 8th to 14th May, according to the HFPC of Jiangsu province. The patients were reported in Nantong city(77-year-old male, fatal) and Yancheng city(57-year-old male) -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail ****** [3] Hebei Date: Sat 20 May 2017, 12:55 PM Source: FIC (Flu Information Centre/Flu in China) [edited] During the period from [12 May 2016] to [18 April 2017], Hebei province reported 6 human H7N9 AIV cases. Two cases in Chengde city, 2 cases in Langfang city, 2 cases in Shijiazhuang city. Chengde: 1) 53-year-old male 2) 71-year-old female Langfang 1) 30-year-old male 2) 46-year-old male Shijiazhuang 1) 62-year-old female, surname Lu, resident in Dongjiazhuang village of Qianxiguan town of Gaocheng district of Shijiazhuang city 2) 73-year-old female -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail ****** [4] Shandong Date: Sun 21 May 2017, 11:22 AM Source: FIC (Flu Information Centre/Flu in China) [edited] According to the authority, Binzhou city reported 1 human H7N9 AIV case on [19 May 2017]. The 74-year-old male patient [surname omitted] had history of multiple visits to live poultry market prior to the onset of symptoms, and now remains in hospital for treatment. All close contacts are under medical monitoring and no one has showed ILI symptoms so far. -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail ****** [5] Sichuan Date: Sun 21 May 2017, 11:28 AM Source: FIC (Flu Information Centre/Flu in China) [edited] According to the authority, Ziliujing district of Zigong city reported 1 human H7N9 AIV case on [20 May 2017], this is the 1st human H7N9 AIV case reported in Zigong city. The 44-year-old male, [surname omitted], had worked in wet market for live poultry trading for years, was in stable condition and remained in designated hospital in Chengdu for treatment and quarantine. -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail [The continuous reporting of human cases merits active surveillance and more awareness efforts for the high risk groups and the general public. Wet market closures in areas where human cases are continually being reported can be helpful, as a temporary measure, to break the poultry to human transmission cycle. - Mod.UBA A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  .] [", "HEPATITIS E - UK (02): EU PORK PRODUCTS, COMMENTARY *************************************************** A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Tue 23 May 2017 Source: Gideon (Global Infectious Disease Epidemiology Network) [edited] A recent posting in ProMED discussed the threat of hepatitis E related to pork products imported into the United Kingdom from France, Germany and the Netherlands. Indeed, all countries concerned have been reporting increasing rates for this disease in recent years - see graph [1] : Reference: 1. Gideon Graphs Tool, -- Communicated by: Prof. Steve Berger Geographic Medicine Tel Aviv Medical Center Israel [ProMED once again thanks Steve Berger and Gideon online for this information. Clearly zoonotic hepatitis E has become a significant issue in Europe. This virus is the only classical hepatitis virus that may be zoonotic in origin. - Mod.LL A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  .] [", "TYPHOID FEVER - SYRIA: (ALEPPO) ******************************* A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Tue 23 May 2017 Source: Syria Direct [edited] A former Islamic State stronghold in Syria's northern Aleppo province is now facing a public health crisis \"beyond the city's capabilities,\" sources on the ground tell Syria Direct, as dozens of residents are contracting typhoid fever daily as a result of contaminated water. The source of the outbreak is likely contaminated drinking water from makeshift wells inside al-Bab, a city still reeling in the aftermath of a months-long military campaign by Turkish-backed rebels to drive the Islamic State (IS) from its last remaining northern Syria stronghold earlier in 2017. Free Syrian Army (FSA) forces supported by Turkish and United States-led coalition airstrikes fought for 3 and a half months to take the city, which lies roughly 40km [24.85 mi] northeast of Aleppo city and 30km [18.64 mi] south of the Turkish border. Before IS withdrew in late February 2017, an estimated 30 000 of the city's 150 000 residents had fled both the airstrikes and strict IS rule, according to the United Nations. Those who returned home after IS was driven out found a city in ruins, now controlled by Turkish-backed FSA rebels. Landmines, planted by IS fighters as they fled, dotted the streets. Residents discovered their homes had been flattened under bombs, their personal possessions looted by retreating gunmen. An estimated \"75 percent\" of the city was reduced to rubble, one returning resident told Syria Direct in March 2017. Still, tens of thousands of residents began streaming back home to al-Bab in February and March 2017 as battles further east were just beginning to set up the conditions for the current typhoid outbreak. Forces loyal to Syrian President Bashar al-Assad in northern Aleppo province were waging their own, separate campaign to reclaim a swathe of towns and villages from IS outside al-Bab. In early March 2017, pro-Assad forces seized hundreds of kilometers of mostly rural farmland along the eastern bank of the Euphrates. Among the gains in March 2017 was major water pumping station located an estimated 45km [27.96 mi] southeast of al-Bab that once provided the city's sole source of safe running water. Though pro-regime news outlets reported soon afterwards that the water station began operating once again, people in al-Bab say the water is not flowing. Without an active water source, al-Bab's residents \"are now digging their water out from wells inside the city,\" said one local activist, who spoke with Syria Direct on condition of anonymity. The wells are basic, constructed with little regard--or likely any technical knowledge--of appropriate locations. Some of the makeshift wells are being built directly above what remains of the city's sewage system, multiple sources told Syria Direct. As a result, raw sewage is leaking into water used for drinking, cooking and cleaning in private homes. \"This is the main cause for the current typhoid outbreak,\" the activist in al-Bab said. Typhoid, a potentially deadly bacterial infection, spreads via contaminated feces and urine -- meaning al-Bab's raw sewage leakage is a likely culprit for the recent outbreak, says Dr Mohammad Ismail, who runs a private clinic inside the city and is treating 10 to 15 new typhoid patients each day. Ismail's clinic is one of at least 10 new medical practices in al-Bab that have opened since IS withdrew from the city. But the scale of the water contamination is \"simply beyond the city's capabilities,\" the doctor told Syria Direct. Among the ruins left behind in al-Bab is the city's healthcare system. Even before the FSA and its allies began their battle late In 2016 to seize the city, IS fighters prevented anyone but their own \"personnel and families\" from receiving medical care, 37-year-old resident [AAE] told Syria Direct in February 2017. Today, with IS gone, healthcare is available to all--but only one public hospital and a field clinic remain standing to treat the dozens of city-wide residents contracting typhoid. Others must turn to small private clinics such as Ismail's. For everyone, medicine and equipment are in desperately short supply. Typhoid is typically treated with antimicrobials that kill the disease-causing bacteria. But even the blood and urine tests that Ismail would have once used to diagnose typhoid patients are now \"unavailable.\" Al-Bab's medical sector is pitifully \"ill-equipped and underserved,\" the doctor says, creating a potent breeding ground for \"the spread of infectious, communicable disease.\" Al-Bab's typhoid outbreak is the latest health crisis in Syria as the war shatters a once self-sufficient healthcare system in all areas of the country. As early as 2013, the World Health Organization (WHO) warned that the war would \"create a potential risk of outbreaks.\" Up to 70 percent of Syria's medical workforce had already fled by the summer of 2013, according to the same statement. \"We are anticipating a number of public health risks from water-borne diseases, specifically hepatitis, typhoid, cholera and dysentery,\" Dr. Jaouad Mahjour, director of the Department for Communicable Diseases at WHO's regional office said in the 2013 release. Now, more than 4 years later, healthcare is \"a casualty\" of the conflict as medical facilities across the country \"lack clean water, electricity and sufficient medical and surgical supplies,\" according to a March 2017 WHO press release. Al-Bab residents caught in the middle of their own public health crisis say they have few alternatives to avoid illness. Clinics in the city can do little to help, and bottled water prices have risen by 50 percent in recent weeks, making it a luxury for most. A single mother who cannot afford to buy bottled water for her 3-year-old son reported that last week [week of Sun 14 May 2017], his stomach \"began to hurt, and his body temperature rose,\" she told Syria Direct. After 3 days, she finally took him to a doctor who diagnosed him with typhoid fever.  \"He said the well water was likely the cause of my son's illness.\" Now, a week after he began feeling sick, she says her son is not improving. A 30-year-old father in al-Bab, was more fortunate. An employee in a money exchange, he still manages to afford small amounts of bottled water for his own toddler in an effort to stave off typhoid. The children of his sister fell ill in with typhoid in recent weeks after drinking contaminated well water. Seeing his sick nieces and nephews scared him into purchasing bottled water \"to prevent [my own child] from getting typhoid,\" he told Syria Direct. \"My wife and my daughter -- I'm afraid they'll get sick.\" -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail Rapporteur George A Robertson [ProMED thanks George Robertson for this report. LIke cholera, typhoid fever spreads primarily from contaminated water and in wartime, infectious such as these can be major causes of morbidity and mortality in both civilian and military populations. - Mod.LL A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  .] [", "FEBRILE RHABDOMYOLYSIS - ITALY: ex WEST AFRICA, REQUEST FOR INFORMATION *********************************************************************** A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Tue 23 May 2017 From: Patricia Schlagenhauf , David Hamer [edited] Francesco Castelli and Silvia Odolini from the GeoSentinel Brescia site would like to draw attention to undiagnosed severe febrile rhabdomyolysis in refugees arriving from West Africa, mainly from Nigeria, presenting in Italy. Cases have been observed at the Geosentinel site in Brescia and at 12 other infectious diseases and internal medicine centers located in several Italian cities (Negrar, Verona, Firenze, Mineo, Pavia, Reggio Emilia, Milan, Bologna). A total of 48 cases were observed, mainly young males (22.4 \u00b1 5.8 years). All patients had fever and very intense muscle aches with inability to stand and walk. CPK, aspartate aminotransferase (AST), lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) values were always abnormal. Rhabdomyolysis was believed to be related to an infective agent in 16 (33.3percent) cases. In detail EBV-DNA was detected in 8 of 32 patients that were tested, IgM for Coxsackie virus in 5 of 27 and IgM for Cytomegalovirus in 3 of 29. In the remaining cases, the etiology was undefined. Four out of 7 patients tested for abnormal haemoglobins had sickle cell trait and one patient had hemophilia A. No seawater ingestion has been reported. In these cases the long incubation period does not support a mechanical cause of rhabdomyolysis. Otherwise, common viral infections like Epstein-Barr or Coxsackie virus are hardly associated with such severe clinical presentation. It is speculated that other predisposing conditions, in particular genetic factors considering the common area of origin, or unknown viral infections, may be involved. Targeted surveillance of rhabdomyolysis cases is warranted. If you have seen similar presentations at your site, please reply all and share your experience. -- Patricia Schlagenhauf Chair GeoSentinel Tracking and Communications David Hamer PI GeoSentinel on behalf of GeoSentinel [Muscle damage causing elevated levels of CPK and myoglobin can be caused by a host of infectious and non-infectious etiologies. The following is a publication from Brescia that parallels these cases without a definitive etiology. All 4 cases presented with febrile rhabdomyolysis and subsequently recovered. No uniform diagnosis was made. Sabatini T, Begni A, Belli D, Fillipini A: Febrile rhabdomyolysis in African migrants coming to Italy through the Mediterranean Sea: A report of 4 cases. Case Rep Intern Med 2016;3: 36-37 URL: ABSTRACT Introduction: In the last years many migrants, mostly from Africa and Middle East, are trying to reach Europe through the Mediterranean Sea. The crossing of the sea is usually associated to several problems, as overcrowding, promiscuous contacts with other people, physical and psychological distresses, malnutrition, dehydration and prolonged sunshine exposure. Case presentation: We report the cases of 4 young people (3 males and one female) African refugees presenting, after about 4 weeks from arrival in Europe, a febrile illness with high fever, severe prostration and very intense muscle aches with impossibility to stand and walk. Viral serology was not univocal. The patients recovered completely in almost a week. Conclusions: We think that migrants of Refugees Centers should undergo medical visits to check their clinical status and, in case of febrile illnesses, evaluated to understand the causes and the pathophysiology of these febrile diseases. It is also important to collect and register, from different European Refugee Centers through an International Organization, similar cases to prevent, in case of contagious diseases, the possible diffusion inside the Centers but also in the Community. - Mod.LL Other information about cases and potential etiologies would be welcome. - Mod.LM A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  .] .................................................ep/ll/ec/lxl/lm *##########################################################* ************************************************************ ProMED-mail makes every effort to verify the reports that are posted, but the accuracy and completeness of the information, and of any statements or opinions based thereon, are not guaranteed. The reader assumes all risks in using information posted or archived by ProMED-mail. ISID and its associated service providers shall not be held responsible for errors or omissions or held liable for any damages incurred as a result of use or reliance upon posted or archived material. ************************************************************ Donate to ProMED-mail. Details available at: ************************************************************ Visit ProMED-mail's web site at . Send all items for posting to: promed@promedmail.org (NOT to an individual moderator). If you do not give your full name name and affiliation, it may not be posted. You may unsub- scribe at . For assistance from a human being, send mail to:  . ############################################################ ############################################################ List-Unsubscribe: http://ww4.isid.org/promedmail/subscribe.php", "TICK-BORNE ENCEPHALITIS - LATVIA (02): COMMENT ********************************************** A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Tue 23 May 2017 From: Steve Berger [edited] Rates of Tick-borne encephalitis reported by Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania have been strikingly similar for the past 2 decades (See graph at  ). This phenomenon seems to have begun only after dissolution of the former Soviet Union, and could reflect similar ecology, weather or other regional factors. Reference: -- Communicated by: Prof. Steve Berger Geographic Medicine Tel Aviv Medical Center Israel [Interestingly, the graph cited above shows a marked peak in incidence of cases per 100 000 population between 1994-1999, with lower, but constant, incidence rates thereafter. As Dr Berger comments, changes in rates of TBE incidence in both Latvia and Estonia could be due to a variety of factors. ProMED thanks Dr Berger for his comments, graph and reference. A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map showing the location of Latvia and Estonia can be accessed at: . - Mod.TY A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  .] [", "UNDIAGNOSED DISEASE - LIBERIA (08): FATAL, MENINGITIS DIAGNOSED *************************************************************** A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Mon 22 May 2017 Source: Outbreak News Today [edited] In a follow-up on the cluster of acute illness and sudden deaths in Liberia, the World Health Organization (WHO) says the etiology has been established as meningococcal meningitis. Out of 24 samples analysed, 13 were confirmed as _Neisseria meningitidis_ serotype C using polymerase chain reaction (PCR) technique. In addition, 4 out of the 5 cases that manifested typical clinical features of meningococcal disease [purpura fulminans (seen in 4 cases), ecchymosis (2 cases), petechial rashes (4 cases), and abdominal pain (4 cases)] were confirmed. In this case, the infectious pathogen (_Neisseria meningitidis_ serotype C) caused meningococcal disease (septicemia an infection of blood) as opposed to meningococcal meningitis (infection of the meninges), which is common in West, Central and East Africa. Meningococcal disease outbreak is very rare in West Africa. The overall situation of the outbreak in Liberia has greatly improved and no new cases and deaths have been reported. As of 19 May 2017, a total of 31 cases including 13 deaths (case fatality rate of 42 percent) have been reported from Sinoe (27 cases and 10 deaths), Montserrado (2 cases and 2 deaths) and Grand Bassa (2 cases and one death) [counties]. The last case was reported on 7 May 2017 while the last death occurred on 2 May 2017. -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts [The initial identification of the etiological agent, _Neisseria mengitidis_ , in these cases was done by the USA CDC. The USA CDC sent 2 meningitis laboratory scientists and one meningitis senior epidemiologist to Liberia to join the staff from the CDC Country Office in Liberia in the investigation This bacterium is very likely responsible for all the reported cases. Fortunately, there have been no new cases reported since 7 May 2017, so the outbreak appears to have ended. Maps of Liberia can be accessed at and . - Mod.TY A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  .] [", "CHOLERA, DIARRHEA AND DYSENTERY UPDATE (34): ASIA (YEMEN) ********************************************************* A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Tue 23 May 2017 3:02pm EDT Source: Reuters [edited] The number of cholera cases in Yemen has leapt, a WHO document showed on [Tue 23 May 2017], with 35 217 suspected cases since 27 April 2017 when the outbreak began to spread rapidly. That represents a 50 percent increase in the reported incidence compared with figures given last [Fri 19 May 2017], by the WHO representative in the country, Nevio Zagaria, who said at that point there had been 23 425 cases since 27 April 2017. A WHO epidemiology bulletin covering the period up to 22 May 2017 said 361 deaths had been reported, mainly in western governorates of Yemen. That is a rise of more than 100 since [Fri 19 May 2017], when Zagaria said 242 people had died. The epidemic began in October 2016 and grew until December. It then dwindled but was never brought fully under control, and a new surge in cases began in April 2017 worsened by the collapse of the economy and the health system. The total number of cases reported since December 2016 stands at 61 000, the bulletin said. Zagaria said last week [week of Sun 14 May 2017] that the total could reach 300 000 in the next 6 months. Caused by ingesting the _Vibrio cholerae_ bacterium from water or food contaminated with faeces, cholera usually manifests itself with a sudden onset of acute watery diarrhea and can kill within hours, although 3-quarters of infected people show no symptoms. The short incubation period means outbreaks can spread with explosive speed, especially in places without safe water and proper sanitation, according to the WHO. Yemen has been ruined by 2 years of civil war, with 18.8 million people needing humanitarian aid, many of them on the brink of famine. Less than 45 percent of the country's health facilities are fully functional. [Byline: Tom Miles] -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail [The dramatically increasing numbers are as follows: Date [2017] / Cases / Deaths 8 May / 1360 / 25 11 May / 2752 / 51 13 May / 8595 / 115 14 May / 11 000 / 180 17 May / 17 200 / 209 19 May / 23 500 / 242 21 May / 29 300 / 315 22 May / 35 217 / 361 . - Mod.LL A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  . A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  .] [", "EUROPEAN FOULBROOD, APIS - EUROPE (02): LIECHTENSTEIN (BALZERS) OIE ******************************************************************* A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Mon 22 May 2017 Source: OIE, WAHID (World Animal Health Information Database), weekly disease information 2017; 30(21) [edited] European foulbrood of honey bees, Liechtenstein ----------------------------------------------- Information received on [and dated] 22 May 2017 from Dr. med. vet. Peter Malin, CVO / Chief Veterinary Officer, Ressort Gesundheit, Amt fur Lebensmittelkontrolle und Veterinarwesen, Schaan, Liechtenstein Summary Report type: immediate notification Date of start of the event: 18 May 2017 Date of confirmation of the event: 18 May 2017 Reason for notification: recurrence of a listed disease Date of previous occurrence: May 2017 Manifestation of disease: clinical disease Causal agent: _Melissococcus plutonius_ Nature of diagnosis: clinical, laboratory (basic) This event pertains to the whole country. New outbreaks (1) Summary of outbreaks: Total outbreaks: 1 Outbreak 1: Balzers, Oberland, Liechtenstein Date of start of the outbreak: 18 May 2017 Outbreak status: continuing (or date resolved not provided) Epidemiological unit: apiary Affected animals: Species / Susceptible / Cases / Deaths / Killed and disposed of / Slaughtered Bees (hives) / 1 / 1 / 0 / 1 / 0 Outbreak statistics [rates apparent, expressed as percentages] Species / Morbidity rate / Mortality rate / Case fatality rate / Proportion susceptible animals lost* Bees (hives) / 100 / 0 / 0 / 100 * Removed from the susceptible population through death, destruction, and/or slaughter Epidemiology Source of the outbreak(s) or origin of infection: unknown or inconclusive Control measures Measures applied: vaccination permitted (if a vaccine exists); no treatment of affected animals Measures to be applied: movement control inside the country; surveillance within containment and/or protection zone; official destruction of animal products; official disposal of carcasses, by-products and waste; stamping out; zoning; disinfection. Diagnostic test results Laboratory name and type / Species/ Test/ Test date / Result Medical Laboratory (ZLM), St. Gallen (Regional Laboratory) / Bees / bacteriological examination / 18 May 2017 / Positive Future reporting The event is continuing. Weekly follow-up reports will be submitted. [The location of the outbreak can be seen on the interactive map included in the OIE report at the source URL above.] -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail [European foulbrood was also detected in the municipality of Schaan on 10 May 2017. See comments in ProMED-mail posting http://promedmail.org/post/20170516.5040910. - Mod.CRD A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  .] [", "VARROOSIS, APIS - FRANCE: (REUNION ISLAND), 1ST REPORT, OIE *********************************************************** A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Mon 22 May 2017 Source: OIE, WAHID (World Animal Health Information Database), weekly disease information 2017; 30(21) [edited] Varroosis of honey bees, Reunion (France) ----------------------------------------- Information received on [and dated] 22 May 2017 from Dr Loic Evain , Directeur General adjoint, CVO, Direction generale de l'alimentation, Ministere de l'Agriculture, de l'Agroalimentaire et de la Foret, Paris, Reunion (France) Summary Report type: immediate notification Date of start of the event: 4 May 2017 Date of confirmation of the event: 9 May 2017 Reason for notification: 1st occurrence of a listed disease Manifestation of disease: clinical disease Causal agent: _Varroa destructor_ Nature of diagnosis: clinical, laboratory (basic) This event pertains to a defined zone within the country New outbreaks (1) Summary of outbreaks Total outbreaks: 1 Outbreak 1: Saint Denis, Saint Denis, Saint Denis, Reunion Date of start of the outbreak: 4 May 2017 Outbreak status: continuing (or date resolved not provided) Epidemiological unit: apiary Total animals affected: Species / Susceptible / Cases / Deaths / Killed and disposed of / Slaughtered Bees (hives) / 7 / 1 / 0 / 7 / 0 Affected population: The bee epidemiological surveillance network detected the presence of Varroa destructor in an apiary located in Saint-Denis. The national reference laboratory (ANSES, Sofia Antipolis) confirmed the identification of _Varroa spp._ on [9 May 2017]. Outbreak statistics [rates apparent, expressed as percentages] Species / Morbidity rate / Mortality rate / Case fatality rate / Proportion susceptible animals lost* Bees (hives) / 14.29 / 0 / 0 / 100 *Removed from the susceptible population through death, destruction, and/or slaughter Epidemiology Source of the outbreak(s) or origin of infection: Unknown or inconclusive Epidemiological comments: As this parasite is exotic in Reunion, emergency measures were applied as of [5 May 2017], even before laboratory confirmation. Hive movements are forbidden all across the territory. A 5 km [approx. 3.1 mi] protection zone and a 10 km [approx. 6.2 mi] surveillance zone were implemented around the outbreak. Within those zones, all apiaries are being checked and any infested apiary will be destroyed. A campaign for checking any hive on the whole territory is being performed at the same time. Control measures Measures applied: movement control inside the country, surveillance outside containment and/or protection zone , surveillance within containment and/or protection zone, stamping out, disinfestations, vaccination permitted (if a vaccine exists), no treatment of affected animals Measures to be applied: no other measures Diagnostic test results Laboratory name and type / Species / Test / Test date / Result ANSES national reference laboratory, Sofia Antipolis (National laboratory) / bees / parasitological examination / 9 May 2017 / Positive Future reporting The event is continuing. Weekly follow-up reports will be submitted. [The location of the outbreak can be seen on the interactive map included in the OIE report at the source URL above.] -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail [For additional background information including diagnostic methods and references, please refer to the OIE Terrestrial Manual 2016, Chapter 2.2.7 \"Varroosis of honey bees (Infection of honey bees with _Varroa spp._)\" at  , from which the following commentary is quoted: \"The mite _Varroa destructor_ (formerly _Varroa jacobsoni_) is a parasite of adult bees and their brood. It penetrates the intersegmental skin between the abdominal sclera of adult bees to ingest haemolymph. It can sometimes be found between the head and thorax. The number of parasites steadily increases with increasing brood activity and the growth of the bee population, especially late in the season when clinical signs of infestation can first be recognised. The life span of the mite depends on temperature and humidity but, in practice, it can be said to last from some days to a few months.\" Pictures of _Varroa destructor_ can be seen at  . A map of Reunion can be seen at  . - Mod.CRD] [", "EBOLA UPDATE (25): NEWS, RESEARCH, VACCINE *************************************************************** A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases In this update: [1] News - WHO - African response to outbreak - 4th case fatality DR Congo - South Sudan: borders closed - Nigeria: seaports - EU [European Union] humanitarian air service [2] Research - International responders [3] Vaccine - WHO ****** [1] News 21 May 2017 DRC: WHO optimistic on controlling DRC Ebola outbreak [The World Health Organization's [WHO's] regional chief for Africa says prospects for rapidly controlling the spread of the deadly [Ebola virus disease (EVD)] in Democratic Republic of Congo are good. WHO reports 29 suspected cases, including 3 deaths since the outbreak was discovered in a remote region of DRC on [22 Apr 2017]. WHO's regional director for Africa does not underestimate the difficulties that lie ahead in bringing this latest outbreak of [EVD] in Democratic Republic of Congo to an end. Matshidiso Moeti notes the outbreak is centered in a remote area where it is difficult to operate and to bring in the personnel and material needed to contain this deadly disease. But, she tells VOA she is very encouraged by the speed with which the government and its national and international partners have responded to this crisis. Moeti continues, \"But, I am quite optimistic because this is a government that is experienced at this and which has got off to a very quick start and we are already on the ground with the partners,\" she said. \"We are getting logistic support from WFP [World Food Program] and from the U.N. mission. So, I am quite optimistic.\" Moeti calls the remoteness of the area a mixed blessing. \"It is, of course, an area from which we are not expecting rapid expansion of the outbreak to other localities due to population movement as happened in West Africa. Although we are keeping a close eye on the Central African Republic...where we are concerned that there is insecurity there. There is some population movement there,\" she said. Moeti says it is difficult to operate and carry out surveillance or investigations in this area because roads for car traffic do not exist. She says the government has fixed up a landing strip to enable helicopters to fly in the experts and material needed to combat this deadly disease.\"] 20 May 2017 DRC: African countries on alert over DR Congo Ebola outbreak [African countries, including Rwanda, Uganda, Ghana, Kenya and Nigeria, have heightened surveillance measures at borders following an outbreak of the deadly [Ebola virus disease (EVD)] in the Democratic Republic of Congo (DR Congo). Rwanda has kicked off new screening measures at its official border posts with DR Congo in order to detect [EVD]. Anyone entering Rwanda via official border posts with the DR Congo in Rubavu and Rusizi districts will go through temperature screening procedures, said a statement released by the Rwanda ministry of health on Fri [19 May 2017]. Uganda's minister of state for health Sarah Opendi told Xinhua that the country's National Health Task Force has been reactivated. She said health workers in Uganda's western border districts have been put on alert to monitor people coming in from DR Congo. \"We have written to all District Health Officers to increase on surveillance, raise public awareness and alert the people about the Ebola outbreak\" in DR Congo, said Opendi. In Ghana, the Ghana Health Service (GHS) on Fri [19 May 2017] issued an alert on [EVD], calling on regional directors to enhance their preparedness. Kenya's Director of Medical Services at the Ministry of Health Jackson Kioko said the government has reactivated the rapid response teams for enhanced surveillance and follow up of travelers with elevated body temperatures and asymptomatic cases with history of travel from DR Congo. \"We wish to assure Kenyans that there is no suspected case of [EVD] in the country and they should remain vigilant, look out for any such illnesses and report to the nearest health facility without delay for immediate verification and investigation,\" Kioko said. Tanzania has dispatched a team of medical experts in 6 regions in an effort to improve detection and information systems against outbreak of [EVD]. Health authorities in Zambia have also intensified surveillance in areas bordering DR Congo. Minister of Health Chitalu Chilufya said the government has put in place intervention measures to ensure that the disease does not enter Zambia.] 22 May 2017 DRC: 4th person succumbs to Ebola in Congo - WHO [A 4th person is suspected to have died after succumbing to [Ebola virus disease (EVD) in the Democratic Republic of (DRC) Congo. The World Health Organization (WHO) said on Sun [21 May 2017] that the person had died in a remote part of north-eastern DRC, bringing the total number of cases in Africa to 37. Two of the 37 cases were confirmed as [Ebola virus disease, EVD], while 3, including the latest death, are considered probable of being [EVD], and 32 were suspected, WHO's Congo spokesperson Eugene Kabambi told the media. Mobile laboratories have been dispatched to the zone where the disease is prevalent by the health authorities who are monitoring 416 people who had come into contact with sufferers, Kabambi added.] 22 May 2017 DRC: Gbudue, Tombura States [South Sudan] close borders with DRC in fear of Ebola virus disease (EVD) spread [Tombura Deputy Governor, Lino Utu said the decision to close the 2 borders is a primary preventive measure the 2 States have taken following a report of 2 [Ebola virus disease (EVD)] death cases on 11 May 2017 and 29 suspected. The move comes a day when Gbudue State formed a task force monitoring committee to monitor the border over reports of a 2nd pandemic [EVD] outbreak in DRC since the first of 1976 near the Ebola River in the DRC.] ...more [Gbudwe State is one of the 28 states of South Sudan created on 2 Oct 2015. It is located in the Equatoria region of South Sudan, and borders DR Congo. - Mod.LK] 23 May 2017 Nigeria: Govt unveils plans to check Ebola at seaports [The Federal Government has instituted measures to ensure that the deadly [Ebola virus disease (EVD)] does not find its way back to the country through the seaports. Consequently, government is deploying officials of Port Health Services and Nigerian Ports Authority, NPA, to achieve the containment. Speaking to newsmen in Lagos weekend, Port Manager of Lagos Port Complex, Apapa, Hajia Aisha Ali-Ibrahim, said all hands were on deck to intensify screening of seafarers coming into the country through the waterways and also ensure appropriate screening at all entry points into the port. She also said NPA was giving all necessary support to the Port Health Services to ensure there were no loopholes in carrying out the checks.] ...more 23 May 2017 DRC: Stylianides announces first EU airlift for Ebola outbreak in DR Congo [The EU today [23 May 2017] announced its 1st tranche of aid in the fight against the Ebola outbreak in DR Congo. The announcement in Brussels came as the beleaguered country announced the 4th suspected death from the disease. Some 37 cases have now been reported in the north east of the gigantic but impoverished and politically unstable former Belgian colony. Speaking in Brussels, Crisis Management Commissioner Christos Stylianides said: \"It's vital to reach the affected areas and support early efforts in tackling the latest Ebola outbreak in the Democratic Republic of Congo. The EU's humanitarian air service will help get specialized personnel and medical supplies to the northeast of the country.\"] ...more ****** [2] Research 16 May 207. CF Houlihan, McGowan CR, Dicks S et al. Ebola exposure, illness experience, and Ebola antibody prevalence in international responders to the West African Ebola epidemic 2014-2016: A cross-sectional study. PLoS Medicine 14(5): e1002300.  [edited] [excerpts: Abstract Background ---------- Healthcare and other front-line workers are at particular risk of infection with Ebola virus (EBOV). Despite the large-scale deployment of international responders, few cases of Ebola virus disease have been diagnosed in this group. Since asymptomatic or pauci-symptomatic infection has been described, it is plausible that infections have occurred in healthcare workers but have escaped being diagnosed. We aimed to assess the prevalence of asymptomatic or pauci-symptomatic infection, and of exposure events, among returned responders to the West African Ebola epidemic 2014-2016. Conclusions ----------- This is the 1st study, to our knowledge, of the prevalence of EBOV infection in international responders. More than 99 percent had clear negative results. Sera from 2 individuals had discordant results on the different assays; both were negative on the competitive assay, suggesting that prior infection was unlikely. The finding that a significant proportion experienced \"near miss\" exposure events, and that most of those who experienced symptoms did not get tested for EBOV at the time, suggests a need to review and standardise protocols for the management of possible exposure to EBOV, and for the management of illness, across organisations that deploy staff to outbreaks.] [The authors conclude from their study that protocols for the management of possible exposure to Ebola virus and for the management of illness should be reviewed and standardised across organisations that deploy staff to outbreaks. - Mod.LK] -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail Rapporteur Mary Marshall ****** [3] Vaccine 22 May 2017 DRC: WHO ready to deploy [Ebola virus disease (EVD) vaccine in disease outbreak. [For the 1st time during a live outbreak of [Ebola virus disease (EVD)], a vaccine could be used to stop the spread of the disease, the World Health Organization [WHO] has said. In a press briefing on 18 May 2017, WHO said that it had been in discussions with the government of the Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC) about deploying the vaccine to combat the outbreak of the disease declared on 12 May 2017. As of 17 May there have been 20 cases of Ebola in the country [now 37, see above. - Mod.LK], 2 of which have been laboratory confirmed. A total of 4 people have died in the outbreak, which is centered in the Likati area in the north of the] ...more (Gulland A. BMJ 2017;357:j2454) [compiled by: Celeste Whitlow ] -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail [Location: - Democratic Republic of Congo (4o 18\u2032 38\u2033 S, 15o 17\u2032 22\u2033 E) - Democratic Republic of the Congo (2o 52\u2032 34\u2033 S, 23o 39\u2032 18\u2033 E) A map of the affected area can be seen at  and a HealthMap/ProMED-mail map of the DRC at  . - Mod.LK] [", "EQUINE INFECTIOUS ANEMIA - USA (03): (COLORADO) *********************************************** A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Mon 22 May 2017 Source: The Horse [edited] Earlier this month [May 2017] the Colorado Department of Agriculture (CDA) quarantined a Weld County facility after a horse residing there tested positive for equine infections anemia (EIA). Now, 6 additional horses at that premises have tested positive for EIA, as well. On [Thu 4 May 2017] the CDA's State Veterinarian's Office received notice of the positive test from the USDA National Veterinary Services Laboratory. The index horse was euthanized following the positive test. At the time, the CDA placed the horse's home facility under a quarantine order restricting the movement of other horses until further testing was completed. On [Fri 19 May 2017], the Equine Disease Communication Center reported that \"3 horses out of 9 horses exposed ... tested positive for equine infectious anemia. Six horses are now quarantined. None of the horses testing positive had clinical signs of the disease.\" Equine infectious anemia is a viral disease that attacks horses' immune systems. The virus is transmitted through the exchange of body fluids from an infected to a non-infected animal, often by blood-feeding insects such as horseflies, and more rarely through the use of blood-contaminated instruments or needles. A Coggins test screens horses' blood for antibodies that are indicative of the presence of EIA, and most U.S. states require horses to have proof of a negative Coggins test in order to travel. Once an animal is infected with EIA, it is infected for life and can be a reservoir for the spread of disease. Obvious clinical signs of the disease include progressive loss of condition along with muscle weakness and poor stamina. An affected horse also could show fever, depression, and anemia. [Byline: Erica Larson] -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail [This is sad news for this stable, and for horse owners. Vector control practices, including application of insecticides and repellents and environmental insect control, should be implemented. Hopefully the facility has already done this. Currently there is no vaccine for EIA in the US. There is a vaccine developed in China and used in other places. [Equine infectious anemia - USA (04): (KY) unlicensed vaccine http://promedmail.org/post/20150915.3645562]. - Mod.TG A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  .] [", "LUMPY SKIN DISEASE - EUROPE (05): FYR MACEDONIA, BOVINE, OIE ************************************************************ A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases [1] Lumpy skin disease - FYR Macedonia, Tetovo [2] Lumpy skin disease - FYR Macedonia, Kocani ****** [1] Date: Tue 23 May 2017 Source: OIE WAHID weekly disease information [edited] Lumpy skin disease [LSD], Former Yugoslavian Republic [FYR] of Macedonia ------------------------------------------------------------------------ Information received on 23 May 2016 from Msc Zoran Popovski, director, Food and Veterinary Agency, Food and Veterinary Agency, Skopje, FYR of Macedonia Summary Report type: immediate notification (final report) Date of start of the event: 4 Jan 2017 Date of confirmation of the event: 10 Jan 2017 Date event resolved: 10 Apr 2017 Reason for notification: Recurrence of a listed disease Date of previous occurrence: 4 Apr 2016 Manifestation of disease: Clinical disease Causal agent: Lumpy skin disease virus Nature of diagnosis: laboratory advanced This event pertains to a defined zone within the country New outbreaks (1) Total outbreaks: 1 Outbreak 1: Gradets, Vrapchishte, Terovo Date of start of the outbreak: 4 Jan 2017 Outbreak status: resolved 10 Apr 2017 Epidemiological unit: village Total animals affected: Species / Susceptible / Cases / Deaths / killed and disposed of / Slaughtered Cattle / 34 / 2 / 0 / 2 / 0 Outbreak statistics [rates apparent, expressed as percentages]: Species / Morbidity rate / Mortality rate / Case fatality rate / Proportion susceptible animals lost* Cattle / 5.88 / 0 / 0 / 5.88 *Removed from the susceptible population Epidemiology Source of the outbreak(s) or origin of infection: unknown or inconclusive Control measures Measures applied: movement control inside the country, traceability, official destruction of animal products, official disposal of carcasses, by-products and waste, disinfection, disinfestations, control of vectors, vaccination permitted (if a vaccine exists), no treatment of affected animals Measures to be applied: No other measures Diagnostic test results Laboratory name and type / Species / Test / Test date / Result Veterinary Institute Laboratory (National laboratory) / Cattle / real-time PCR / 10 Jan 2017 / Positive Future reporting The event is resolved. No more reports will be submitted. [The location of this outbreak can be seen on the interactive map included in the OIE report at the source URL above.] -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail ****** [2] Date: Tue 23 May 2017 Source: OIE WAHID weekly disease information [edited] Lumpy skin disease [LSD], Former Yugoslavian Republic [FYR] of Macedonia ------------------------------------------------------------------------ Information received on 23 May 2016 from Msc Zoran Popovski, director, Food and Veterinary Agency, Food and Veterinary Agency, Skopje, FYR of Macedonia Summary Report type: immediate notification (final report) Date of start of the event: 19 Apr 2017 Date of confirmation of the event: 22 Apr 2017 Date event resolved: 22 Apr 2017 Reason for notification: Recurrence of a listed disease Date of previous occurrence: Oct 2016 Manifestation of disease: Clinical disease Causal agent: Lumpy skin disease virus Nature of diagnosis: laboratory advanced This event pertains to a defined zone within the country New outbreaks (1) Total outbreaks: 1 Outbreak 1: Beli, Kochani, Kocani Date of start of the outbreak: 19 Apr 2017 Outbreak status: resolved 22 Apr 2017 Epidemiological unit: village Total animals affected: Species / Susceptible / Cases / Deaths / killed and disposed of / Slaughtered Cattle / 15 / 1 / 0 / 1 / 0 Outbreak statistics [rates apparent, expressed as percentages]: Species / Morbidity rate / Mortality rate / Case fatality rate / Proportion susceptible animals lost* Cattle / 6.67 / 0 / 0 / 6.67 *Removed from the susceptible population Epidemiology Source of the outbreak(s) or origin of infection: unknown or inconclusive Control measures Measures applied: movement control inside the country, traceability, official destruction of animal products, official disposal of carcasses, by-products and waste, disinfection, disinfestations, control of vectors, vaccination permitted (if a vaccine exists), no treatment of affected animals Measures to be applied: No other measures Diagnostic test results Laboratory name and type / Species / Test / Test date / Result Veterinary Institute Laboratory (National laboratory) / Cattle / real-time PCR / 22 Apr 2017 / Positive Future reporting The event is resolved. No more reports will be submitted. [The location of this outbreak can be seen on the interactive map included in the OIE report at the source URL above.] -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail [Information from FYR Macedonia's last OIE 6-monthly report (Jul-Dec 2016) indicates that, during 2016 the country reported 356 outbreaks of Lumpy skin disease (LSD). For further details on these outbreaks, see section 3 of this report. See report at  . All outbreaks of LSD reported from 1 January 2015 to date [Wed 24 May 2017] can be seen on the interactive map at  (click on the section of interest on the map, and zoom in). - Mod.CRD According to information of the European Union Lumpy Skin Disease Vaccine Bank, 625 000 doses of live-homologous LSD vaccine have been granted to various south European countries during 2016, of which 50 000 to the FYR Macedonia (delivered in May 2016). The above and additional information on LSD in southern Europe, as of Jan 2017, is available at  . According to another presentation, titled \"In vivo evaluation of Lumpy Skin Disease vaccine efficacy in controlled environment\", none of the tested LSD live-attenuated vaccines (including the live-homologous one currently in field use) protected against the initial post-vaccination fever spike. A new, inactivated Vaccine, produced by MCI, Morocco, is under investigations. Reportedly, this refers to 2 vaccines - a sheep pox based and an LSDV-based vaccine. Both, reportedly, showed \"promising results after one vaccination\" while \"booster vaccination was needed\" (see, along with additional information on the vaccines testing, at  . It will be interesting to note any advances in these vaccines tasting since January 2017, and their mutual comparison. Thanks to Sabine Zentis for referring us to the said documents, published by the European Medicines Agency on [Thu 18 May 2017]. - Mod.AS A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  .] [", "VACCINE PREVENTABLE DISEASES - PAKISTAN: SINDH, VARICELLA, MEASLES, REQUEST FOR INFORMATION ******************************************************************************************* A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Tue 23 May 2017 Source: Daily Times [edited] The sudden outbreak of the dangerous viral diseases measles and chickenpox in Larkana and Sukkur divisions has increased to the extent that 25 children were admitted in one day on [Sun 21 May 2017] at a private medical center in Larkana. During the last 2 months, as many as 116 affected children were admitted in Children's Hospital Larkana and Paeds Ward of Sukkur Hospital out of which as many as 25 children have died. In both these major hospitals, 25 to 30 children are brought daily to the OPD. It is believed that the viral diseases have turned into an epidemic due to a lack of proper EPI [Expanded Program on Immunization] vaccination. These diseases infect children aged between 1 to 6 years. In April 2017, as many as 37 cases were recorded and in [Mon 22 May 2017], 22 children were admitted to Children's Hospital Larkana. They were suffering from either measles or from chickenpox - out of these, 9 children died. In Sukkur Teaching Hospital, as many as 57 children were admitted during April and May [2017]. A total of 16 of these also died from their illness. Head of Paeds Medicine Department, Prof Saifullah Jamro, told media on [Mon 22 May 2017] that cases of measles and chickenpox are constantly rising and preventive measures should be adopted immediately. He reported that on Sunday alone, as many as 20 affected children were brought to his private clinic; which is evidence of the fact that these viral diseases are spreading very fast. Prof Jamro revealed that more than 15 cases daily arrive at Pano Akil, Saleh Patt and other nearby health facilities. He stated that if a child is suffering from measles and is also infected with chickenpox, then the situation becomes very tough - this is a majority of them losing their lives. He added that cases of pneumonia have also increased. To a question, Prof Jamro affirmed that the only preventive measure is proper vaccination for these infectious viral diseases. He believed the health department will have to take foolproof measures and gear up its vaccination teams. April and May are usually the season for these diseases. Another senior doctor revealed - on condition of anonymity - that the Expanded Program on Immunization (EPI) has lost the priority of the health managers and focus of the government has been shifted to eradication of polio as all the health workers are deployed for administering anti-polio drops throughout the province. Previously, vaccinators were assigned tasks to visit every area to carryout preventive vaccinations. As a result, the outburst was minimized but now these workers are directed to perform polio duties without fail. The same doctor further opined that efficacy of the preventive vaccines is also a big question mark because of worst electricity load shedding in Sindh and due to cold chain of storage from the store of District Health Office (DHO) to further down, including THQs, BHUs & RHCs, vaccination centers and then to the end users - which should also be looked into seriously. He further said that routine vaccination is made to prevent diseases like polio, tuberculosis, diphtheria, tetanus, Pertussis, hepatitis, pneumonia, measles and typhoid. [Byline: Jamal Dawoodpoto] -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail [It seems that the number of Varicella (chickenpox) and Measles cases being reported from Sindh province is also on the rise after reports from Punjab (Varicella - Pakistan (03): (PB) RFI http://promedmail.org/post/20170519.5048428) and Khyber Pakhtunkhwa (Pomed SoAs post: Measles - Pakistan (08): (Khyber Pakhtunkhwa) outbreak alert http://promedmail.org/post/20170522.5053172). Both the viral infections are vaccine preventable and therefore can be controlled by active surveillance, case investigation and timely response measures. The following information was received from Epicore member requesting anonymity; 'Khairpur Sindh: A total of 19 cases including 2 deaths were identified. Vaccination of 6 month to 10 years children with Vit-A supplementation was started in the area' Any further information in this regard will be highly appreciated. - Mod.UBA A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  .] [", "TYPHOID FEVER - NEW ZEALAND (04): (MANAWATU-MANGANUI) ***************************************************** A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Wed 24 May 2017 Source: News Hub [edited] Medical staff in Palmerston North are moving quickly to contact anyone who was in proximity with a child who has a confirmed case of typhoid. Medical Officer of Health Dr Patrick O'Connor says a patient was admitted to the hospital with a blood infection last week [week of Sun 14 may 2017], with results now confirming it is the disease. It is believed the child has family connections to the Auckland outbreak of typhoid in April 2017, which afflicted 18 people and caused one woman to die due to complications from it. \"Since admission to hospital, the patient has been treated in isolation, and infection control processes are in place to prevent the spread of this infection,\" Dr O'Connor said. \"This has minimized the risk to other patients and to hospital staff.\" People in close contact with the Palmerston North child were sampled over the weekend and one is being treated with antimicrobials. Dr O'Connor said the child attended an early childhood center and medical staff will work with the center on Wednesday and Thursday, 24-25 May 2017, to take samples from children and staff. \"It is important to understand that typhoid is spread by eating or drinking water that is contaminated with feces or urine from a person who has the illness, or who may be a carrier of the bacterium. Casual social contact such as visiting a person in hospital, or hugging and kissing them is not a significant risk to people,\" he said. Typhoid symptoms include a high fever developing over several days, as well as headaches, general weakness and muscle aches. Stomach pain and constipation are also common but some people get diarrhea. -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail [Palmerston North ( ) is a city located in the Manawatu-Whanganui region of the North Island of New Zealand, commonly referred to as Palmerston, or Palmy by locals. The initial outbreak of _S._ Typhi was in Aukland, on the north side of North Island. As noted, in the posting, there is a connection between at least one of the children and the cluster in Aukland. The infection is transmitted primarily from person-to-person via contaminated water or food rather than direct spread although the childcare setting is problematic. - Mod.LL A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  .] [", "CHOLERA, DIARRHEA AND DYSENTERY UPDATE (35): AFRICA, ASIA ********************************************************* A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases In this update: Africa [1] Cholera - Sudan (White Nile) Asia [2] Diarrhea, fatal - India (Uttar Pradesh) [3] Diarrhea, dysentery - Nepal (Kathmandu) ****** [1] Cholera - Sudan (White Nile) Date: Tue 23 May 2017 Source: relifweb, Radio Dabanga report [edited] Cases of cholera have appeared in the state capital of North Kordofan for the first time. The disease is spreading rapidly in White Nile state, where 7 people died in Kosti on [Sat 20 May 2017]. The hospital in El Obeid, capital of North Kordofan, received 38 cases of cholera. A medical source told Radio Dabanga that cholera infections appeared in the city 2 days ago. A total of 5 new cases that emerged in Karima district were transferred to the hospital, while 13 patients were transferred from El Wehda district. The cholera patients have been isolated in the dermatology ward. A medical source told Radio Dabanga that the patients are denied any visit. \"There is a sign with 'No entry, special cases' that prohibits entry of visitors.\" On [Sat 20 May 2017], 7 people died of cholera in Kosti, in the south of White Nile state, where the cholera has spread into epidemic proportions. The Eye Hospital in the town has been turned into an isolation centre to accommodate the rising number of cases: currently 183 patients remain here, according to medical sources. \"Most of the cases arrived from Block 54 in the western part of Kosti on [Mon 22 May 2017],\" a medical worker said. \"The health situation is very serious. New cases have emerged in El Duweim, Um Jar, and Abu Shibeika.\" A school in Asalaya is transformed into an isolation centre for 126 people infected with cholera. Abdelrahman El Siddig, the head of civil society organisations in White Nile state, told Radio Dabanga that 1 person died of cholera on [Mon 22 May 2017]. In September 2016, Radio Dabanga received reports about people stricken by \"acute watery diarrhea\" in Blue Nile state. Since then the deadly disease spread to other areas. The states of North and South Kordofan remained, according to reports from the field, unaffected. Though Sudanese medics have confirmed that the disease concerns cholera, federal health authorities continue to deny its presence. In April 2016, a journalist was detained in eastern Sudan for reporting about cholera. -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail [White Nile state in Sudan can be seen on this map: - Mod.LXL/LM] ****** [2] Diarrhea, fatal - India (Uttar Pradesh) Date: Sat 20 May 2017 Source: The Times of India (TOI), Times News Network (TNN) [edited] In a suspected outbreak of diarrhoea in Mat and Surir villages of Mathura, 9 children, between the age group of 1 and a half years to 12 years, and a 30-year-old woman have died in the last 3 days and over 150 have been admitted to hospitals. Though no deaths were reported on [Sat 20 May 2017], local administration have launched preventive steps to control further outbreak of diarrhoea in these and neighboring villages. Talking to TOI, Chief Medical Officer, RK Nayyar said that they have received reports of 10 diarrhea-related deaths, including that of a 30-year-old woman, from the villages but no deaths have occurred in any of the government health centres or hospitals. He said, \"We are working to find out the cause of deaths\" but he admitted that there has been a suspected diarrhea outbreak in about 22 villages in Surir, Mat and Naujheel areas. He said 9 teams of doctors have been formed and they are visiting these affected villages and so far 150 people have been admitted in the hospital. He said presently 40 were still undergoing treatment. Nayyar said samples of water were collected on [Fri 19 May 2017], after the first death was reported, and sent to Agra SN Medical College laboratory for culture. He said stool samples of patients have also been sent to Agra on [Sat 20 May 2017], and the state epidemiologist and microbiologist from Lucknow have also visited the villages. Dr Karan Singh, of Ohawa village in Surir area, where 2 deaths have been reported, said that a 1 and a half year old and a 11-year-old had died on [Thu 18 May 2017]. He said since the financial condition of the parents of the 2 children was not good, they delayed matters and took them to hospital only when their condition had deteriorated. A farmer who runs a NGO in village Deragaon told TOI that a 12-year-old died a couple of days back. He was not well but his parents were treating him at home only and he died. He said there are lots of problems in the village including non-availability of wash rooms and even the water supply is not good. He said even the water from hand pumps is dirty and salty. He added that the health department team visited the village and distributed medicines, besides advising people some precautionary measures. Talking to TOI, District Magistrate, Mathura, Arvind Malappa Banagari said that the administration was taking all precautionary measures to prevent further spread of diarrhoea and for the treatment of the patients. He said besides distribution of medicines, the teams are advising the villagers to use boiled water and avoid consumption of cut fruits and ice creams, made by substandard companies. He said since the majority of the causalities have taken place among the families of brick kiln workers, they are being advised not to use water from contaminated sources. He added that the Jal Nigam has been instructed to see that pumps discharging sub-standard water are stopped immediately and food inspectors have been instructed to shut these open makeshift shops and ice-cream vendors. [Byline: Anuja Jaiswal] -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts [The etiology or etiologies of this outbreak is not clear but with fatalities occurring, the possibility of cholera must be considered. - Mod.LL] ****** [3] Diarrhea, dysentery - Nepal (Kathmandu) Date: Thu 18 May 2017 From: Anup Bastola [edited] A total of 118 cases of acute diarrhea and dysentery cases have been admitted from Kathmandu valley and have received treatment from the hospital since mid-March 2017. Most of them presented with watery diarrhea. Although few cases presented in shock cholera, hasn't yet been laboratory proven. The number of cases expected to increase in coming days because of ongoing raining and contamination of surface and ground water which is the common source of drinking water in many places in Kathmandu. Public awareness on hand hygiene and safe drinking water needed for prevention of major outbreaks. -- Anup Bastola, MD Sukraraj Tropical and Infectious Disease Hospital, Teku, Kathmandu, Nepal [ProMED thanks Dr. Bastola for his post. The mortality from cholera and most diarrheal illnesses is related to non-replacement of fluid and electrolytes from the diarrheal illness. As stated in Lutwick LI, Preis J, Choi P: Cholera. In: Chronic illness and disability: the pediatric gastrointestinal tract. Greydanus DE, Atay O, Merrick J (eds). NY: Nova Bioscience, 2017 (in press) oral rehydration therapy can be life-saving in outbreaks of cholera and other forms of diarrhea: \"As reviewed by Richard Guerrant et al. (1), it was in 1831 that cholera treatment could be accomplished by intravenous replacement, and, although this therapy could produce dramatic improvements, not until 1960 was it 1st recognized that there was no true destruction of the intestinal mucosa, and gastrointestinal rehydration therapy could be effective, and the therapy could dramatically reduce the intravenous needs for rehydration. Indeed, that this rehydration could be just as effective given orally as through an orogastric tube (for example, refs. 2 and 3) made it possible for oral rehydration therapy (ORT) to be used in rural remote areas and truly impact on the morbidity and mortality of cholera. Indeed, Guerrant et al. (1) highlights the use of oral glucose-salt packets in war-torn Bangladeshi refugees, which reduced the mortality rate from 30 percent to 3.6 percent (4) and quotes sources referring to ORT as \"potentially the most important medical advance\" of the 20th century. A variety of formulations of ORT exist, generally glucose- or rice powder-based, which contain a variety of micronutrients, especially zinc (5). \"The assessment of the degree of volume loss in those with diarrhea to approximate volume and fluid losses can be found in ref. 6 below. Those with severe hypovolemia should be initially rehydrated intravenously with a fluid bolus of normal saline or Ringer's lactate solution of 20-30 ml/kg followed by 100 ml/kg in the 1st 4 hours and 100 ml/kg over the next 18 hours with regular reassessment. Those with lesser degrees of hypovolemia can be rehydrated orally with a glucose or rice-derived formula with up to 4 liters in the 1st 4 hours, and those with no hypovolemia can be given ORT after each liquid stool with frequent reevaluation.\" References ---------- 1. Guerrant RL, Carneiro-Filho BA and Dillingham RA. Cholera, diarrhea, and oral rehydration therapy: triumph and indictment. Clin Infect Dis. 2003;37(3):398-405. 2. Gregorio GV, Gonzales ML, Dans LF and Martinez EG. Polymer-based oral rehydration solution for treating acute watery diarrhoea. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2009;(2):CD006519. doi: 10.1002/14651858.CD006519.pub2. 3. Gore SM, Fontaine O and Pierce NF. Impact of rice based oral rehydration solution on stool output and duration of diarrhoea: meta-analysis of 13 clinical trials. BMJ 1992; 304(6822): 287-91. 4. Mahalanabis D, Choudhuri AB, Bagchi NG, Bhattacharya AK and Simpson TW. Oral fluid therapy of cholera among Bangladesh refugees. Johns Hopkins Med. 1973; 132(4): 197-205. 5. Atia AN and Buchman AL. Oral rehydration solutions in non-cholera diarrhea: a review. Am J Gastroenterol. 2009; 104(10): 2596-604, doi: 10.1038/ajg.2009.329. 6. WHO. The treatment of diarrhoea, a manual for physicians and other senior health workers. 4th ed. 2005. - Mod.LL A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  .] [", "FEBRILE RHABDOMYOLYSIS - ITALY (02): ex WEST AFRICA, COMMENTARY *************************************************************** A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Wed 24 May 2017 From: Dr. Steve Berger [edited] Febrile rhabdomyolysis in a group of Nigerian refugees may suggest a diagnosis of leptospirosis. In fact, reactivation of Epstein-Barr virus infection, noted in some of these patients, has been reported as a complication of Weil's disease. [1] Reference: 1. Karrasch M, Herfurth K, Kl\u00e4ver M, et al: Severe leptospirosis complicated by Epstein-Barr virus reactivation. Infection 2015;43: 763-769. -- Steve Berger MD Tel Aviv Medical Center Tel Aviv, Israel [ProMED thanks Dr. Berger for his response. The abstract of the citation from Germany in Dr. Berger's post is shown below. It is not clear that the patient had the epidemiological features of the Italian cases and it appears that the Italian cases resolved without specific antimicrobial intervention. \"Weil's disease is a severe, potentially fatal illness following Leptospira interrogans infection. The reported case of a patient suffering from acute renal failure, jaundice, thrombocytopenia, rhabdomyolysis and encephalitis syndrome highlights the clinical challenge in reference to Weil syndrome complicated by Epstein-Barr Virus (EBV) reactivation. The diagnosis of leptospirosis was performed using 4 different diagnostic methods. Sera were analyzed with an in-house IgM and IgG enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) and indirect haemagglutination assay (IHA). Microscopic agglutination test (MAT) was done using 17 reference strains comprising 14 serogroups and 17 serovars. Polyvalent EBV-IgG analysis, EBV-IgG/IgM/IgA western blot analysis as well as quantitative EBV polymerase chain reaction (PCR) were performed. Leptospira IHA showed an initial titer of 1:640 (cut-off 1:320), leptospiral IgG was negative, but IgM was positive. MAT was negative at that time for all 17 strains analyzed. One week later, leptospirosis IHA titer increased to 1:20,480. Leptospiral IgG was now positive, -IgM remained positive and urine was tested negative for leptospiral DNA. The MAT showed positive results for _L. interrogans_ serovar Bataviae, serovar Copenhageni, serovar Pyrogenes and _L. borgpetersenii_ serovar Serjoe. During follow-up examinations, both the leptospiral IgM and IgG remained positive and MAT showed positive results for _L. interrogans_ of different serovars. EBV IgA immunoblot taken at admission was positive for VCA-p18, quantitative EBV-PCR showed an EBV viral load of 28 000 copies/ml indicating acute EBV-reactivation. Leptospirosis represents a neglected and re-emerging disease, which is difficult to diagnose since Leptospira-PCR from whole blood or urine is frequently negative in the case of early empiric antibiotic treatment. EBV-reactivation might represent a severe complication in Weil's disease, which potentially aggravates clinical manifestations of leptospirosis including hepatitis, nephritis, and rhabdomyolysis. Thus, there might be a need for peripheral blood EBV-PCR and EBV blotting in patients suffering from complicated Weil syndrome, also in terms of the choice of antimicrobial treatment.\". - Mod.LL] [", "SALMONELLOSIS - AUSTRALIA (02): (NEW SOUTH WALES) SANDBOXES, BANDICOOT DROPPINGS ******************************************************************************** A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Tue 24 May 2017 Source: Daily Telegraph [edited] A playground on the northern beaches has been closed after 2 children became sick with salmonella after playing in the sandpit. The young children caught the infection, which is believed to be spread by contact with bandicoot droppings, after playing at Warriewood Valley Rocket Park, in Casuarina Dr. Northern Sydney Local Health District director of public health Dr Michael Staff said he hoped to have contained the outbreak by advising the council to close the park quickly. \"We hope that the closure of the park will prevent further cases,\" he said. A sand sample taken from the playground was tested after 2 confirmed _Salmonella_ Java cases were reported to the public health unit. The 2 cases were children who became unwell in April 2017. One was reported to the health unit in late April 2017 and the other in early May 2017. They were unwell with fever, abdominal pain and diarrhea. Both have since made a full recovery without requiring hospital treatment. Apparently, the children played in the playground in the week prior to becoming unwell. Dr Staff said he believed they contracted the illness through ingesting contaminated sand. However, he suspected that the bacteria had been brought to the sandpit by infected children who were already sick, rather than bandicoot droppings in the sandpit. \"Once the bug is in the sand it can grow,\" he said. Part of the playground was closed last week [week 15 to 21 May 217] and now the whole playground is shut, with signs erected warning of the infection and barriers in place. A spokesperson from Northern Beaches Council said the sand would have to be removed and they were unsure whether to replace it. Dr Staff said the most important advice for parents of young children was to stop them putting their hands in their mouths when they're playing outside and to wash their hands after they have been outside. The Northern Sydney Local Health District said there are some simple steps people can take to reduce the risk of children coming into contact with bandicoot droppings including fence proofing and regularly maintaining your backyard. For further advice go to  . [Byline: Julie Cross] -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail [Previous ProMED postings about such cases have implicated the strain of _Salmonella_ in past cases and here as the L (+) tartrate + variant of _S._ Paratyphi B that is sometimes referred to as _S._ Java. The classical _S._ Paratyphi B has the tartrate negative phenotype and is generally invasive causing an enteric fever-like illness similar to typhoid fever. Although the tartrate positive variant can be invasive, it generally is less invasive and is associated with diarrhea. The citation of the paper, published in the July 2012 issue is: Staff M, Musto J, Hogg G, Janssen M and Rose K: Salmonellosis outbreak traced to playground sand, Australia, 2007-2009. Emerg Infect Dis [serial on the Internet]. 2012 Jul [date cited].  ; Emerg Infect Dis 2012; 18: 1159-1162. The long-nosed bandicoot (_Perameles nasuta_) ( ) is a species of bandicoot found in Australia. It is the largest member of its genus, which also includes the eastern barred bandicoot and the desert bandicoot. The long-nosed bandicoot is much less colourful than its relatives, being primarily a brown color. It is distributed along the eastern coast of Australia from Cairns in Queensland to Naringal in southwestern Victoria. It is a nocturnal, solitary predator of invertebrates and tubers. The bandicoot ( ) has 2 features which place it apart from other marsupials (mammals that carry their young in pouches): 1) Having many incisor teeth, as do all insect and flesh eating marsupials 2) Their 2nd and 3rd toes are grown together (like the kangaroo). Bandicoots hop around like kangaroos on their larger hind legs though they are much smaller ranging from 6 inches to 22 inches in length. Depending on the species their fur can be orange, greyish, or brown or striped. A picture of the animal can be found at:  . - Mod.LL A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  .] [", "MERS-COV (28): QATAR, SAUDI ARABIA (RIYADH, ASIR, HAIL) ******************************************************* A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases In this update: [1] Qatar, 1 new case - media report [2] Saudi Arabia 1 new case - Saudi MOH 20-24 May 2017 ****** [1] Qatar, 1 new case - media report Date: Wed 24 May 2017, 9:25 AM Source: The Peninsula Qatar [edited] The Ministry of Public Health (MOPH) has announced that a new Middle East Respiratory Syndrome Corona Virus (MERS-CoV) case has been confirmed for a 29 years old, resident in Qatar, marking the 3rd MERS-CoV case to be confirmed in the country this year [2017] and bringing the cumulative number of confirmed MERS-CoV cases since 2012 to 21 cases among whom 7 have died. The patient is a camel worker and had complaints of fever and dry cough for several days. He sought a medical attention in Hamad General Hospital where an X-Ray investigation suggested a severe pneumonia. Consequently and as he reported an occupational frequent contact with camels, further samples were withdrawn from the patient. He ultimately tested positive for MERS-CoV according to Hamad Medical Corporation laboratories. Despite his stable condition, the patient was admitted to hospital, in consistence with the national infection prevention and control protocol for confirmed and suspected MERS-CoV cases to ensure the appropriate medical attention. However, neither a history of contact with similar cases nor a recent travel outside the country was reported for the patient who has no comorbidities. Once the case has been confirmed, the rapid response team of the Health Protection and Communicable disease Control (HP & CDC) department at the MOPH, accompanied with the team from Animal Health Department, Ministry of Municipality and Environment, have started a field investigation to assess the possible source of the infection and to verify whether any of the patient contacts has suspected symptoms according to the WHO standard case definition. Consequently, all traced contacts will be monitored over a period of 2 weeks, while those who develop suspected symptoms will then be subjected to confirmatory laboratory investigation. The Ministry of Public Health advises citizens and residents, in particular those with comorbidities or low immunity, to abide to cough etiquette and handwashing with soap and water thoroughly and avoid unnecessary contact with sick animals. MOPH proclaimed that Health Protection & CDC Hotlines 66740948 & 66740951 are accessible 24/7 to respond to any notification or enquiry related to infectious diseases. -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail [As stated in the above media report, this is the 3rd case of MERS-CoV confirmed in Qatar since 1 Jan 2017, and the 21st case reported from Qatar since MERS-CoV was identified in September 2012. As a reminder, the 2nd confirmed case of illness due to infection with the MERS-CoV was confirmed in the UK in September 2012 in a Qatari national who was medivac'd to the UK for diagnosis and treatment. (see Novel coronavirus - Saudi Arabia (03): UK HPA, WHO, Qatar http://promedmail.org/post/20120923.1305982). Previously, investigations into camel herds associated with MERS-CoV infections in humans where the viruses have been sequenced have identified similar MERS-CoVs in both the camels and the humans (a good example of this can be found in Haagmans BL, Al Dhahiry SHS, Reusken CBEM, et al. Middle East respiratory syndrome coronavirus in dromedary camels: an outbreak investigation. Lancet Infect Dis. 2014 Feb;14(2):140-5. Epub 2013 Dec 17. available at: where the investigation involved a Qatari human case and a camel herd in Qatar). Note, the above media report is almost a verbatim report from that available on the Qatar MOH website:  . The HealthMap/ProMED map of Qatar can be found at:  . - Mod.MPP] ****** [2] Saudi Arabia 1 new case - Saudi MOH 20-24 May 2017 Date: Wed 24 May 2017 Source: Saudi MOH 20-24 May 2017 [edited] As of 14:00 [2:00 PM] today [Wed 24 May 2017], there have been a total of: 1612 laboratory-confirmed cases of MERS-CoV infection, including 665 deaths [reported case fatality rate 41.3 percent], 936 recoveries, and 13 currently active cases [As previously mentioned, the numbers of deaths, recoveries and currently active cases come from my spreadsheet tallies and differ from those listed on the Saudi MOH website. - Mod.MPP] Since the last ProMED-mail update [Fri 19 May 2017], there have been a total of: 1 newly confirmed case 2 newly reported fatalities, and 1 newly reported recovery. Information on newly confirmed case (1 case) Date: Sun 21 May 2017 (1 case) 1 - A 64-year-old Saudi male, non-healthcare worker from Hail [Hail region] currently in stable condition. Classified as a primary case with high risk exposure history in the 14 days preceding onset of illness currently under investigation. Information on newly confirmed fatalities (2 fatalities) Date: Wed 24 May 2017 (2 fatalities) 1- A 55-year-old expat male, non-healthcare worker from Riyadh [Riyadh region] with a history of pre-existing co-morbidities. [reported as a newly confirmed case on 14 May 2017 at which time he was noted to be in critical condition. Classified as a primary case with high risk exposure history in the 14 days preceding onset of illness currently under investigation. - Mod.MPP] 2- A 71-year-old expat male, non-healthcare worker from Bisha [As\u012br region] with a history of pre-existing co-morbidities. [reported as a newly confirmed case on 9 May 2017 at which time he was noted to be in critical condition. Classified as a primary case with high risk exposure history in the 14 days preceding onset of illness currently under investigation. - Mod.MPP] Information on newly confirmed recovery (1 recovery) Date: Wed 24 May 2017 (1 recovery) - A 25-year-old expat female healthcare worker from Riyadh [Riyadh region] with no co-morbidities. [Reported as a newly confirmed case (infection) on 16 May 2017 presumably as part of contact tracing as she was reported as an asymptomatic case who was in stable condition at the time of report. Classified as a secondary healthcare-acquired case in a healthcare worker. - Mod.MPP] -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail [In the 5 days since the last MERS-CoV update, Saudi Arabia has confirmed 1 additional MERS-CoV infection in Hail (Hail region). The most recent previous case reported from Hail was on 27 Feb 2017. Like many of the newly confirmed cases, this case is classified as a primary case pending further information on possible high risk exposures in the 14 days preceding onset of illness. A review of cases reported by Saudi Arabia and classified as \"primary\" cases (N=560), 27.3 percent had a history of camel exposure, and 72.7 percent were reported as still under investigation for high risk exposures at the time of initial confirmation report. Maps showing the locations of the newly reported case, fatalities and recovery can be found at the source url. The HealthMap/ProMED map of Saudi Arabia can be found at . - Mod.MPP A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  .] [", "RABIES - BOLIVIA: (SANTA CRUZ) HUMAN, FATAL ******************************************* A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Sat, 20 May 2017 Source: El Nuevo Diario [in Spanish, trans. Mod.PMB, edited] An 11-year-old girl died of rabies after being in a coma for a week. This is the 2nd case of death caused by rabies reported in Bolivia during May [2017]. The girl was in a coma at the Hospital Ni\u00f1o Mario Ortiz, in Santa Cruz city, where she was hospitalized several days before. After being vaccinated against human papilloma virus, she felt sick and was taken to the hospital. \"Clinical exams and lab tests allow confirming that the cause of death was encephalitis due to rabies, and there is no possibility of this death to be linked to the vaccine against human papilloma virus\", said Rodolfo Rocabado, of the Ministry of Health. According to an official agency (ABI), the girl sheltered stray dogs at her home days before she felt ill. At the beginning of May [2017], a 14 year-old youngster died of rabies in Santa Cruz. -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts [Bolivia is amongst the countries with the highest incidence of human rabies transmitted by dogs in the Western hemisphere. Canine rabies control activities require urgent action, but this has been challenging in Bolivia due to social, cultural, and economic factors. - Mod.PMB A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  .] [", "TYPHOID FEVER - ZAMBIA: (LUSAKA) ******************************** A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Wed 24 May 2017 Source: All Africa, Zambia Reports [edited] Residents in Lusaka's Kalingalinga are up in arms with the Ministry of Health following the outbreak of typhoid in the compound. A water crisis in the area has contributed to the outbreak. The residents have appealed to the government to facilitate uninterrupted supply of water to the area. The Ministry of Health has urged residents to keep their environment clean and assured that the water problem will soon be tackled by the Lusaka Water and Sewerage Company. In Mtendere, workers engaged to dig drainage have downed tools after the contractor failed to pay them for 2 months. The Millennium Project said the contractor had duly been paid and should not shift blame. In Chibombo a surprise visit to rural health post caught workers off guard. Government officials have condemned the laissez-faire attitude of civil servants toward work. Central Province Permanent Secretary Chanda Kabwe was upset to find one clinic closed while clinical staff were reporting for work late at other locations. The PS has decided to transfer the supervisor of one of the new health post for failing to manage his staff in a bid to fight the poor working culture. [Byline: Bwembya Mutale] -- George Robertson [ProMED thanks George Robertson for this posting. Typhoid fever is the classical human infection caused by _Salmonella enterica_ serotype Typhi. Unlike most salmonellae, _S._ Typhi is not zoonotic, being a pathogen only of humans, and may cause constipation and not diarrhea. As a reminder, the term abdominal typhus is still used in some places to refer to typhoid fever, since typhus (caused by _Rickettsia prowazekii_) and typhoid fever (caused by _Salmonella_ Typhi) present quite similar symptoms, such as the fever pattern, the rash, and the cloudy mental state (also called coma vigil). For travelers to the developing world, especially VFRs (visitors to friends or relatives), there are 2 basic modalities to avoid this infection: 1. avoidance of risky drinks and foods and 2. vaccination. CDC summarizes these modalities on its website ( ): 1. \"Boil it, cook it, peel it, or forget it\" - If you drink water, buy it bottled or bring it to a rolling boil for 1 minute before you drink it. Bottled carbonated water is safer than uncarbonated water. - Ask for drinks without ice unless the ice is made from bottled or boiled water. - Avoid popsicles and flavored ices that may have been made with contaminated water. - Eat foods that have been thoroughly cooked and that are still hot and steaming. - Avoid raw vegetables and fruits that cannot be peeled. Vegetables like lettuce are easily contaminated and are very hard to wash well. - When you eat raw fruit or vegetables that can be peeled, peel them yourself. (Wash your hands with soap first.) Do not eat the peelings. - Avoid foods and beverages from street vendors. It is difficult for food to be kept clean on the street, and many travelers get sick from food bought from street vendors. 2. Vaccinations If you are traveling to a country where typhoid is common, you should consider being vaccinated against typhoid. Visit a doctor or travel clinic to discuss your vaccination options. Remember that you will need to complete your vaccination at least 1-2 weeks (dependent upon vaccine type) before you travel so that the vaccine has time to take effect. Typhoid vaccines lose effectiveness after several years; if you were vaccinated in the past, check with your doctor to see if it is time for a booster vaccination. Taking antibiotics will not prevent typhoid fever; they only help treat it. The chart below provides basic information on typhoid vaccines that are available in the USA. Vaccine name / How given / Number Doses / Time between doses / Booster -------------------------------------------------------------------------------- Ty21a / 1 capsule orally / 4 / 2 days / 5 years Typhim Vi / Injection / 1 / N/A / 2 years (The old parenteral heat-phenol-inactivated vaccine -manufactured by Wyeth-Ayerst- has been discontinued). - Mod.LL A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  .] [", "TILAPIA SYNCYTIAL HEPATITIS - ISRAEL: (HAZAFON) EMERGING DISEASE, OIE ********************************************************************* A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Sun, 21 May 2017 Source: OIE, WAHID (World Animal Health Information Database), weekly disease information 2017; 30(21) [edited] Tilapia Syncytial Hepatitis, Israel --------------------------------- Information received on [and dated] 21 May 2017 from Dr Nadav Galon, Director, Veterinary Services and Animal Health, Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development, BET DAGAN, Israel Summary Report type: Immediate notification Date of start of the event: 1 Aug 2011 Date of confirmation of the event: 1 Mar 2014 Report date: 21 May 2017 Date submitted to OIE: 21 May 2017 Reason for notification: emerging disease Morbidity: 6 percent Mortality 2 percent Zoonotic impact: No Causal agent: Tilapia lake virus New outbreaks (1) Outbreak 1 (Kineret outbreak), Kineret Lake, Kineret, Hazafon Date of start of the outbreak: 1 Aug 2011 Outbreak status: continuing (or date resolved not provided) Epidemiological unit: Lake Water type: Fresh water Population type: wild Production system: open Affected animals Species / Morbidity / Mortality tilapins (Tilapia) / 1 (scale 0 to 5) / 0.5 (scale 0 to 5) Affected population: The disease was identified in wild tilapia fish populations in the Kineret Lake. The major symptoms were lethargy, skin erosions, and ocular lesions. Main pathological changes were syncytial hepatitis (all ages) and central nervous system involvement (found mainly in adults). Several outbreaks of the disease affecting cultured tilapins were also recorded. Epidemiology Source of the outbreak(s) or origin of infection: Unknown or inconclusive Epidemiological comments: Tilapia lake virus (TiLV) outbreaks are recorded mostly during the hot season (July-October). Outbreaks occurring in other periods are rare. In aquaculture systems, morbidity and mortality includes fish over 50 grams, although involvement of small fish is not excluded. [The location of the outbreak can be seen on the interactive map included in the OIE report at the source URL above.] -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail [This emerging viral disease of Tilapia fish, observed in Lake Tiberias (aka Kinneret Lake, Sea of Galilee, Lake of Gennesaret) in 2011, has since been subject to international, cooperative research. (http://promedmail.org/post/20150127.3122740 and Refs 1, 2). In view of its economical and international impacts it has now been recognised as an emerging disease according to OIE's criteria, and consequently notified as such to the OIE. OIE's maps do not present the lake; to view its location, see map at  . The Tilapia Lake virus has, by now, been reportedly detected in Tilapia fish in 2 continents: Asia (Israel) and America (Ecuador, Colombia) and regarded \"an emerging global scourge to tilapiine aquaculture which is a multi-billion dollar industry\" (Ref 3). References ---------- 1. Eyngor M, Zamostiano R, Kembou Tsofack JE, et al: Identification of a novel RNA virus lethal to tilapia. J Clin Microbiol. 2014; 52(12): 4137-46. doi: 10.1128/JCM.00827-14. Available at . 2. J. del-Pozo, N. Mishra, R. Kabuusu, S. Cheetham, A. Eldar, E. Bacharach, W. I. Lipkin, and H. W. Ferguson. Syncytial Hepatitis of Tilapia (Oreochromis niloticus L.) is Associated With Orthomyxovirus-Like Virions in Hepatocytes. Vet Pathol. 2017 Jan;54(1):164-170. doi: 10.1177/0300985816658100. Available at . 3. R Dinesh, M Rosalind George, K Riji John and Sherry Abraham. TiLV - A worldwide menace to tilapiine aquaculture. Journal of Entomology and Zoology Studies 2017; 5(2): 605-607. Available at  . - Mod.AS A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  .] [", "POLIOMYELITIS UPDATE (07): MOZAMBIQUE, DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF CONGO, VACCINE DERIVED POLIOVIRUS, REQUEST FOR INFORMATION ************************************************************************************************************************ A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: 24 May 2017 From: A reliable source known to ProMED-mail We've learned from a reliable source that there have been vaccine derived poliovirus (VDPV) associated cases recently confirmed in Mozambique and the Democratic Republic of the Congo. We do not have further information on these cases. -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail [The vaccine derived polioviruses (VDPVs) are viruses that have changed genetically from the original attenuated viruses found in the oral poliovirus vaccine (OPV). There are 3 sub-classifications for paralytic polio disease related to infection with vaccine derived poliovirus. The 1st type is related to circulating vaccine derived polioviruses (cVDPVs). This type occurs in areas where the vaccination coverage of the population is low and the attenuated vaccine virus (contained in the oral poliovirus vaccine - OPV) starts circulating among the susceptibles for a prolonged period (12-18 months) and during this process the vaccine virus reverts to a virus with increased neurovirulence leading to cases of paralytic disease caused by the cVDPV. Identification of cVDPVs leads to the same response as identification of wild polioviruses (WPVs). The 2nd type of VDPV is that seen when immunodeficient individuals are exposed to the vaccine virus and are unable to clear the infection so they become chronic excreters of the vaccine. These viruses are referred to as iVDPV. The 3rd type is referred to as ambiguous VDPVs (aVDPV) and these are VDPVs that do not fit under the other 2 categories. The significance of the VDPVs is that as transmission of the WPVs is interrupted, the remaining polioviruses in circulation will be the VDPVs and may lead to continued outbreaks of polio due to the cVDPV. Mozambique was certified as polio free in July 2016. A media report from Mozambique in January 2017 mentioned a case had been identified in November 2016 and an emergency campaign was being held in February 2017 focusing on the Zambezi area where the case was identified. ( ). Another media report mentioned the case had been identified in January 2017 ( ). One wonders if this might be the case referred to as having been identified as a VDPV. The Democratic Republic of the Congo has been identified as a concern location at risk of polio transmission due to low vaccination coverages. A recent ReliefWeb post mentions the confirmation of a case of polio in Butumba, Bukama Territory [Haut Katanga province], and another suspected case in Malemba [Bas-U\u00e9l\u00e9 province]. ( ). Again, one wonders if this might be the case referred to as having been identified as a VDPV (and quite possibly a cVDPV). More information on these reports of polio cases would be greatly appreciated. Were VDPVs identified? If yes, were they further classified as cVDPVs? And further information from the epidemiologic investigations of these cases would be greatly appreciated. The HealthMap/ProMED map of Mozambique can be found at:  . The HealthMap/ProMED map of the Democratic Republic of the Congo can be found at: . Selected references ------------------- 1. Kew OM, Wright PF, Agol VI, et al: Circulating vaccine-derived polioviruses: current state of knowledge. Bull World Health Organ. 2004; 82(1): 16-23. Epub 2004 Feb 26; available at  . 2. Dowdle WR, De Gourville E, Kew OM, et al: Polio eradication: the OPV paradox. Rev Med Virol. 2003; 13(5): 277-91; abstract available at  . 3. Yang CF, Naguib T, Yang SJ, et al: Circulation of endemic type 2 vaccine-derived poliovirus in Egypt from 1983 to 1993. J Virol. 2003; 77(15): 8366-77; available at  . 4. Kew O, Morris-Glasgow V, Landaverde M, et al: Outbreak of poliomyelitis in Hispaniola associated with circulating type 1 vaccine-derived poliovirus. Science. 2002; 296(5566): 356-9. Epub 2002 Mar 14; available at  . 5. Etsano A, Damisa E, Shuaib F, et al: Environmental isolation of circulating vaccine-derived poliovirus after interruption of wild poliovirus transmission - Nigeria, 2016. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep. 2016; 65(30): 770-3; available at 6. Burns CC, Diop OM, Sutter RW, Kew OM: Vaccine-derived polioviruses. J Infect Dis. 2014; 210 Suppl 1: S283-93; available at  . 7: Gumede N, Lentsoane O, Burns CC, et al: Emergence of vaccine-derived polioviruses, Democratic Republic of Congo, 2004-2011. Emerg Infect Dis. 2013; 19(10): 1583-9; available at  . 8. Wassilak S, Pate MA, Wannemuehler K, et al: Outbreak of type 2 vaccine-derived poliovirus in Nigeria: emergence and widespread circulation in an underimmunized population. J Infect Dis. 2011; 203(7): 898-909; available at  . - Mod.MPP] [", "BOTULISM - USA (10): (CALIFORNIA) NACHO CHEESE, TYPE A TOXIN, UNRELATED SECOND DEATH ************************************************************************************ A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Wed 24 May 2017 1:17 pm PDT Source: The Mercury News [edited] The country's foremost researchers on botulism in dairy products are calling the recent [botulism] outbreak at a gas station in Walnut Grove a \"perfect storm\" of circumstances that left one dead and 9 sickened. \"Botulism in cheese products, including processed cheese, is extremely rare,\" said Eric Johnson, professor in the department of bacteriology at the Botulinum Toxins Laboratory at the University of Wisconsin. \"Outbreaks of botulism in commercially processed cheese during the past 50 years is extremely rare and can be counted on the fingers of one hand.\" Although extremely rare, Northern California has seen 2 deaths from foodborne botulism in the last few months. Within the last month, Napa County has had 1 death from botulism related to canned goods, according to county health officials. Since 1950, the USA has seen 3 instances of human botulism outbreaks due to dairy products. In all, 46 people were affected and 2 died. The most recent was in 1993 where a commercially canned cheese sauce was contaminated after it left the factory and sickened 8 people, killing one. \"We want to remind people to properly store canned goods they purchase and if they are canning themselves to follow recommended home canning and preserving procedures so you can ensure as best as possible the safety of your canned goods,\" said Cara Mae Wooledge, public health education specialist for Napa County Public Health. Wooledge reinforced that anyone experiencing symptoms of botulism poisoning, blurry or double vision, nausea or drooping eyelids, should contact their healthcare provider immediately. Before these incidents, there had only been 1 death from foodborne botulism in the state of California in the past 2 decades, according to CDC data. On 28 Apr 2017, the Los Angeles County Public Health Department issued a warning to residents about a deer antler tea product after one confirmed and one suspected case of botulism. The tea was recalled. The California Department of Public Health has said that an open 5-pound bag of Gehl's Jalapeno Cheese Sauce confiscated from the Valley Oak Food and Fuel station tested positive for the botulism toxin. Gehl Foods' CEO Eric Beringause released a statement saying that \"Gehl's facilities remain safe for food production and all of our food samples continue to test negative for any contaminants. There is no recall of Gehl's nacho cheese product.\" Johnson, along with his colleague Kathleen Glass have devoted their lives to studying how to prevent botulism from growing in cheese. Glass, the associate director of the Food Research Institute, received her doctorate in the topic and has co-authored numerous papers on the subject with Johnson. Both have spent decades working out the right combinations that prevent the bacterium, _Clostridium botulinum_, from surviving or growing in cheese. Gehl's cheese is in liquid form and is not pasteurized, but undergoes an \"aseptic process,\" which kills bacteria. The cheese has a shelf life of 12 months, but must be kept above [140 deg F/60 deg C] after opening and the dispenser must remain plugged in. \"If the package is unopened, it is basically sterile. If it's refrigerated, (the bacteria) can't grow. If it's kept above 140 deg F, it can't grow,\" Glass said. \"This was just an alignment of the planets that must have recontaminated it and held it at the right temperature for a long time for it to grow... It's really the perfect storm.\" Botulism is found everywhere, but sickness from the toxin the bacterium produces is rare and mostly affects infants. Botulism among adults is even rarer. Foodborne botulism is rarer still. Due to the rarity, there is a chance that the descending paralysis is misdiagnosed for Guillain-Barr\u00e9 syndrome, a stroke, or other medical conditions that lead to muscle weakness. Although it is sometimes used in medicine to treat muscle spasms or in cosmetics to treat frown lines, the botulism neurotoxin is one of the most potent and lethal substances in the world. The substance, which can fatally paralyze victims, is so dangerous that it is listed as a Category A bioterrorism agent by the CDC. Iraq was said to have produced 19 180 liters of concentrated botulinum toxin in the 1990s, according to the UN Security Council. Less than one-millionth of a gram is enough to kill the average adult. The type A strain of botulinum toxin found in the nacho cheese is the same type that is cultivated for biological weapons. There is no antidote for botulism intoxication, but early use of an antitoxin can lessen the effects of the paralysis. Although symptoms can take anywhere between 6 hours and 10 days to appear, Johnson stated that ideally, the antitoxin should be administered within hours of eating the food to prevent the onset of paralysis. The need for a rapid response is critical in treating any cases of botulism, which is why every case is treated as a public health emergency. After the initial hospitalization on 22 Apr 2017, health officials were able to identify the source 13 days later and prevent further sale of the nacho cheese product at the Valley Oak Food and Fuel. State health officials will not release which counties have reported cases of botulism, citing patient confidentiality. Sacramento and San Joaquin counties have confirmed cases in their counties and Napa County officials have confirmed one botulism case unrelated to the nacho cheese outbreak. Solano County health official Jayleen Richards would neither confirm nor deny any reported cases of botulism in the county. [Byline: Aaron Davis] -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail [This posting underscores the rarity of cheese-associated botulism as well as confirms that the serotype of the toxin was indeed type A, the type that tends to be the most severe in degree and length of illness. The antitoxin used cannot neutralize toxin already bound to neural toxin. This posting also alludes to a 2nd death in California, a case of botulism related to home canning and not related to the nacho cheese-related cluster. It is not stated what home-canned food was involved or whether there were other non-fatal cases. Botulism toxin has its effect at the neuromuscular junction. Mechanistically, when a motor neuron action potential depolarizes the axon terminal, acetylcholine is released from the cytosol into the synaptic cleft. When botulinum toxin (BT) is exposed to the neuromuscular junction, the heavy chain of the botulinum neurotoxin binds to glycoprotein structures specifically found on cholinergic nerve terminals. This specific docking is the reason for BT high selectivity for cholinergic synapses. After internalization, the light chain of the botulinum neurotoxin binds with high specificity to the SNARE protein complex. The target proteins vary among the BT serotypes. BT-A cleaves synaptosomal-associated proteins of 25kDa (SNAP-25). BT-B cleaves vesicle-associated membrane protein (VAMP), also known as synaptobrevin II. - Mod.LL A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  .] [", "CHOLERA, DIARRHEA AND DYSENTERY UPDATE (36): CZECH REPUBLIC ex TANZANIA *********************************************************************** A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Thu 25 May 2017 Source: Radio Praha [edited] The [Czech Republic's] chief hygiene officer, Eva Gottvaldova, has moved to dispel fears regarding the possible spread of cholera, which was confirmed in the Czech Republic on [Wed 24 May 2017]. 2 Czechs recently back from Tanzania were reportedly hospitalized with the disease on their return. They have now been released and are in quarantine. The last case of cholera in the Czech Republic was 15 years ago and was also contracted abroad. People traveling to high-risk areas are recommended to get a vaccine, which is available in the Czech Republic. [Byline: Daniela Lazarov\u00e1] -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail [When waterborne infections are imported into more developed countries with adequate sanitary conditions and clean water, the risk of secondary cases is minimal. Part of the future prevention of cholera in the developing world is cholera vaccine. The following is extracted from Lutwick LI, Preis J, Choi P: Cholera, in chronic illness and disability: the pediatric gastrointestinal tract. Greydanus DE, Atay O, Merrick J (eds). NY: Nova Bioscience, 2017 (in press): \"For a variety of logistic, financial, and historical reasons, vaccines have not been available for cholera control programs outside of Viet Nam. Given as 2 or 3 dose courses, efficacy can be as high as 60-80 per cent for at least 2-3 years but much shorter protection lengths in children younger than 5 years of age. Cost-effectiveness, especially once an outbreak has occurred, had remained unproven until reports from Guinea (57) and Haiti (58) demonstrated utility. The current vaccines prequalified for use by WHO (59) are: - Dukoral (produced in Sweden) that contains several biotypes of O1 with recombinant cholera toxin B subunit, which also offers some protection against enterotoxigenic _E. coli_; - Shanchol (produced in India) that contains biotypes of both O1 and O139 without the recombinant B unit. In a large study in Kolkata, India, a cluster-randomized, double blind, placebo-controlled study of this product (60), the cumulative efficacy of the vaccine at 5 years was 65 per cent (95 per cent CI 52-74, p less than 0.0001). A locally-produced vaccine similar to this vaccine (mORCVAX) is produced in Viet Nam; - Euvichol (produced in South Korea) that, like Shanchol, contains both O1 and O139 without recombinant B subunit. This vaccine has been reported to be non-inferior to Shanchol in a Philippine study (61). References ---------- 57. Luquero FJ, Grout L, Ciglenecki I, et al. Use of _Vibrio cholerae_ vaccine in an outbreak in Guinea. N Engl J Med 2014; 370(22): 2111-20;  . 58. S\u00e9v\u00e8re K, Rouzier V, Anglade SB, et al. Effectiveness of oral cholera vaccine in Haiti: 37-month follow-up. Am J Trop Med Hyg 2016; 94(5): 1136-42;  . 59. Bhattacharya SK, Sur D, Ali M, et al. 5 year efficacy of a bivalent killed whole-cell oral cholera vaccine in Kolkata, India: a cluster-randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial. Lancet Inf Dis. 2013; 13(12): 1050-56;  . 60. WHO. WHO prequalified vaccines.  . 61. Balk YO, Choi SK, Olveda RM, et al. A randomized, non-inferiority trial comparing two bivalent killed, whole cell, oral cholera vaccines (Euvichol vs Shanchol) in the Philippines. Vaccine 2015; 33(46): 6350-65;  . - Mod.LL A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  .] [", "FOOT & MOUTH DISEASE - CHINA (03): (XINJIANG) SEROTYPE A, BOVINE, OIE ********************************************************************* A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Wed 24 May 2017 Source: OIE, WAHID (World Animal Health Information Database), weekly disease information 2017; 30(21) [edited] Foot-and-mouth disease, China (People's Rep. of) ------------------------------------------------ Information received on [and dated] 24 May 2017 from Dr Zhang Zhongqui, Director General, China Animal Disease Control Centre, Veterinary Bureau, Ministry of Agriculture, Beijing, China (People's Rep. of) Summary Report type: immediate notification Date of start of the event: 24 Apr 2017 Date of confirmation of the event: 4 May 2017 Reason for notification: recurrence of a listed disease Date of previous occurrence: 12 Dec 2013 Manifestation of disease: clinical disease Causal agent: Foot and mouth disease virus Serotype: A Nature of diagnosis: clinical, laboratory (basic), laboratory (advanced) This event pertains to a defined zone within the country. New outbreaks (2) Outbreak 1: Aksu, Wushi, Xinjiang Date of start of the outbreak: 24 Apr 2017 Outbreak status: Continuing (or date resolved not provided) Epidemiological unit: farm Affected animals Species / Susceptible / Cases / Deaths / Killed and disposed of / Slaughtered Cattle / 1035 / 221/ 32 / 1003 / 0 Outbreak 2: Changji Hui Autonomous Prefecture, Fukang, Xinjiang Date of start of the outbreak: 28 Apr 2017 Outbreak status: Continuing (or date resolved not provided) Epidemiological unit: farm Affected animals Species / Susceptible / Cases / Deaths / Killed and disposed of / Slaughtered Cattle / 275 / 16 / - / 275 / 0 Summary of the outbreaks, total outbreaks: 2 Total animals affected: Species / Susceptible / Cases / Deaths / Killed and disposed of / Slaughtered Cattle / 1310 / 237/ 32 / 1278 / 0 Outbreak statistics (rates apparent, in percentages) Species / morbidity rate / mortality rate / case fatality rate / Proportion susceptible animals lost* Cattle / 18.09 / ** / ** / ** *Removed from the susceptible population through death, destruction and/or slaughter **Not calculated because of missing information Epidemiology Source of the outbreak(s) or origin of infection: introduction of new live animals Epidemiological comments: the 1st outbreak occurred in 4th regiment, 1st Agricultural Division, Xinjiang Production and Construction Corps, and is located in Wushi county. The 2nd outbreak occurred in 6th Agricultural Division, and is located in Fukang city. Clinical signs were observed by local veterinary authority through active surveillance. WAHIAD note: both outbreaks were first notified on [9 May 2017] within follow-up report no. 2 about foot-and-mouth disease serotype O. [WAHIAD: World Animal Health Information and Analysis Department-OIE. - Mod.CRD] Control measures Measures applied: movement control inside the country, vaccination in response to the outbreak(s), surveillance within containment and/or protection zone, quarantine, official disposal of carcasses, by-products and waste, stamping out, disinfection, no treatment of affected animals Measures to be applied: No other measures Diagnostic test results Laboratory name and type: Lanzhou Foot and Mouth Disease National Reference Laboratory (OIE reference laboratory Species / Test / Test date / Result Cattle / reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) / 4 May 2017 / Positive [The location of the outbreaks can be seen on the interactive map at the source URL above.] -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail [The following comment by Mod.AS, published in posting http://promedmail.org/post/20160407.4144383, is applicable here: \"FMD is regarded to be endemic in China. According to the People's Republic of China page on the WRLFMD [World Reference Laboratory for Foot-and-Mouth Disease] website, last updated in 2015, the following serotypes have been recorded there throughout the years: FMDV-O: 1958, 1986, 1999-2001, 2003, 2005, 2010-2014 FMDV-A: 1951, 1958, 1960, 1962, 1964, 2009-2010, 2013-2014 FMDV-C: 0000 FMDV-Asia 1: 1958, 2005-2009 FMDV-SAT 1: 0000 FMDV-SAT 2: 0000 FMDV-SAT 3: 0000 China's annual reports to the OIE since 2010 mention 2 circulating serotypes: O and A. According to the 2013 genotyping results, as presented in the WRLFMD website, the FMDV-A strain circulating in China is a topotype ASIA, lineage Sea-97 strain; for details, see  .\" - Mod.CRD] [", "ROCKY MOUNTAIN SPOTTED FEVER - MEXICO: (BAJA CALIFORNIA) FATALITIES ******************************************************************* A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Wed 24 May 2017 Source: La Voz de la Frontera [in Spanish, machine trans., edited] The Baja California State Health Secretariat has confirmed 3 new deaths from rickettsiosis. They are a girl of 1 year and 4 months, resident of Nuevo Le\u00f3n in Mexicali, a young girl of 16, and a man of 59, both originating from Ensenada. Guillermo Trejo Dozal, head of the unit, also reported the case of another 55-year-old man living in Nuevo Le\u00f3n, who remains at the General Hospital of Mexicali, where he is stable. With these, there are now 6 deaths due to rickettsiosis and 12 confirmed cases -- 8 in Mexicali, 1 in Tijuana, 2 in Ensenada, and another in Vicente Guerrero. Staff of the Department of Epidemiology of the Ministry of Health reported that preventive actions are being carried out in the community of Nuevo Le\u00f3n where conditions of risk due to the presence of ticks have been located. Trejo Dozal said that the health sector has sufficient supply of medicines to treat the disease, which manifests with fever, headache, muscle pain, and general malaise. In advanced cases, diffuse abdominal pain, as well as red spots on the skin may occur. Among the recommendations made by the health sector to prevent the spread of the disease are: keep the yards free of garbage, weeds, and debris; fumigate the home with appropriate insecticides; vaccinate, bathe, and treat pets; and go to the doctor in case of presenting any of the symptoms mentioned above. The Secretary of Health warned that the increase in temperatures increases the proliferation of ticks, which is why it is essential to take preventive measures into account. [Byline: Ericka Gallego] -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail [The Rocky Mountain spotted fever (RMSF) rickettsia, _Rickettsia rickettsii_, is the cause of this illness, which is also referred to as febre maculosa, S\u00e3o Paulo exanthematic typhus, Minas Gerais exanthematic typhus, and Brazilian spotted fever. The organism, which is tickborne, is distributed through much of the USA, including the Rocky Mountains, and also in parts of southern Canada and Central and South America. It is vital to diagnose this rickettsial infection promptly to minimize morbidity and mortality. When the female tick harboring the organism attaches to a passing human, she usually starts low on the body after transferring from grassy vegetation or even directly or indirectly from a dog. After crawling around on clothes seeking an appropriate cutaneous site (wearing white clothes makes a wandering tick easier to spot), she attaches and begins to feed. If not already partially fed, after attaching, it generally takes 24 hours to activate and transmit the rickettsial organism. For this reason, daily or twice daily tick checks with removal will minimize disease transmission. Ticks that attach in hairy areas such as the scalp or beard may be more difficult to find. The incubation period of the disease is about a week after the tick exposure, long after the tick has detached. The presenting illness is generally nonspecific, with fever, muscle pains, and headache (but the headache is usually described as quite severe). The rash begins on day 3 of illness, initially maculopapular (a flat rash with small raised bumps) at the wrists and ankles before becoming petechial and purpuric (small and larger red or purple spots caused by bleeding under the skin), involving the palms and soles as well as spreading proximally to the trunk. Purpurae usually are not seen before the 6th day of illness. The mortality is indeed quite low if treatment (usually a tetracycline) is begun during the 1st 2 days of the rash or before. Empiric treatment for this infection should always be started in people with compatible symptoms inhabiting endemic areas during the spring and summer, even if no tick bite is known. A picture of the rash in the source URL above appears to be that of varicella not RMSF. The early rash of this disease can be seen at  . - Mod.LL Maps of Mexico can be seen at  and  . - Sr.Tech.Ed.MJ] [", "E. COLI EHEC - GERMANY: O157, SORBITOL-FERMENTING, PACKAGED MINCED MEAT *********************************************************************** A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Thu 25 May 2017 Source: Eurosurveillance, Volume 22, Issue 21 [edited] HUS outbreak caused by sorbitol-fermenting Shiga toxin-producing E. coli (EHEC) O157, Germany, Dec 2016 to May 2017 -------------------------------------------------------------------------------- We report an ongoing, protracted and geographically dispersed outbreak of hemolytic uremic syndrome (HUS) and gastroenteritis in Germany, involving 30 cases since December 2016. The outbreak was caused by the sorbitol-fermenting immotile variant of Shiga toxin-producing (EHEC) _E. coli_ O157. Molecular typing revealed close relatedness between isolates from 14 cases. One HUS patient died. Results of a case-control study suggest packaged minced meat as the most likely food vehicle. Food safety investigations are ongoing. In February 2017, 5 cases of hemolytic-uremic syndrome (HUS) were notified in Germany with onset of illness in week 5, 2017 [week 29 Jan to 4 Feb 2017], which constituted a marked increase compared with the mean in the same week of the previous 5 years (mean: 0.6; range: 0-2 cases). In parallel, the consultant laboratory (CL) for HUS at the University Hospital of M\u00fcnster detected Shiga toxin 2-producing (stx2) sorbitol-fermenting (SF) _E. coli_ (EHEC) O157:H- isolates in 4 HUS patients with disease onset between December 2016 and February 2017. We initiated an outbreak investigation to identify the cause of the outbreak, in order to control it. Epidemiological investigation ----------------------------- SF _E. coli_ O157:H-, stx1-gene negative, stx2-gene positive, eae-gene positive was identified as the outbreak strain. As at 22 May 2017, 30 cases, including 1 family cluster (n\u2009=\u20094), meet the outbreak case definition (Box): 14 confirmed, 1 probable and 15 possible cases have been reported. The outbreak is ongoing; the most recent symptom onset for a confirmed case was 13 Apr 2017 (Figure 1 [for figures and table, see original URL. - Mod.LL]). Case definition --------------- Outbreak cases were defined as cases of HUS(*) or EHEC infection(**) with symptom onset starting on 1 Dec 2016, and residency in Germany. Confirmed cases were defined as cases of HUS or with EHEC infection, with laboratory confirmation of the outbreak strain via WGS base typing or PFGE: SF _E. coli_ O157:H-; stx1-gene negative, stx2-gene positive, eae-gene positive. Probable cases were defined as: - cases of HUS with laboratory confirmation of SF EHEC O157; - cases of STEC infection with laboratory confirmation of SF O157; - cases of HUS, EHEC infection or bloody diarrhea with an epidemiological link to a confirmed or probable case. Possible cases were defined as: - cases of HUS without any pathogen verification, or _E. coli_ without confirmation of SF characteristic, or with confirmation of _E. coli_ serogroup O157, excluding individuals with a laboratory test result conflicting with any characteristic of the outbreak strain, e.g. other serogroup; - cases of EHEC infection with _E. coli_ serogroup O157 laboratory confirmation; - cases of HUS, EHEC infection or bloody diarrhea with an epidemiological link to a possible case. (*) HUS is defined as at least 2 of the following 3 criteria: hemolytic anaemia, thrombocytopenia\u2009\u2264\u200915.000 cells/mm3 or renal impairment; or diagnosis of acute enteropathic HUS by a clinician, or death caused by HUS. (**) EHEC infection clinically defined. The 14 confirmed cases resided in the north-west of Germany and Berlin (Figure 2). The mean age of the confirmed cases was 8.5 years (range: 1-36), half of them were male, 13 developed HUS and needed intensive care treatment; 1 patient died. None of the cases had a relevant pre-existing illness. The probable case, a middle-aged adult, a EHEC enteritis case, was a close family member of 3 confirmed cases. A total of 12 of the 15 possible cases developed HUS and 3 had gastroenteritis; the mean age of the possible cases was 26 years (range: 0-83) and 7 were male. Explorative interviews ---------------------- We interviewed 11 of the confirmed cases or their parents using a standardized trawling questionnaire containing questions on clinical symptoms, travel history, animal contacts, farm visits, other leisure activities and food consumption during 10 days before symptom onset. During 11 explorative interviews, we identified a number of frequently named food items, e.g. minced meat (beef and pork mixed), hot dog-style (Vienna) sausages, as well as several commercially available yoghurts or puddings. Cases and parents also reported having frequently shopped at supermarket chain X. They reported no common place of exposure. None of the cases had travelled in Germany or abroad. Few had had contact with a dog or cat (n\u202f=\u202f4), 1 case had had contact with a donkey, a horse, a sheep, and a goat; 1 had consumed unpasteurised milk. None reported a farm visit or contact with cattle. This supported our initial hypothesis of a food-borne outbreak, which we had suspected based on biological plausibility and the wide geographical distribution of cases. Case-control study ------------------ Following the interviews we conducted a case-control study to investigate the association of illness with food items named frequently in the explorative interviews. For each confirmed case\u2009under\u200913 years of age, we recruited 3 to 6 children reported to the local health authorities with another notifiable disease (e.g. influenza), who lived in the same or a neighboring district as the outbreak case, and belonged to the same age group (1-4; 5-9; 10-12 years). Parents of cases and controls were interviewed by telephone after they had given informed consent. We used a short standardised questionnaire which covered the consumption of the above mentioned food items in the 10 days before symptom onset with details such as brand names, packaging, shopping places, etc. We analyzed the data using MS Excel and Stata 14.1 (Stata Corporation, Texas, USA), compared cases and controls by Chi-squared and Student t-test and estimated matched odds ratios (OR) for consumed food items and supermarkets using the Mantel-Haenszel test. We included 9 confirmed cases and 35 individually matched controls in the analysis. Cases and controls did not differ by sex and age; there was no association between being a case and having consumed different types of desserts (data not shown). Cases had eaten minced meat (beef and pork mixed) significantly more frequently than controls (Table). All cases (6/6) with the respective information reported this exposure. The parents of the cases prepared minced meat at home significantly more frequently than parents of the controls and they were significantly more likely to have purchased the minced meat at supermarket chain X (OR: 14.1; 95 percent confidence interval (CI): 1.2-174.9). However, only 3 of 8 cases were explained by this exposure and the CI was wide. Shopping mostly or exclusively at supermarket chain X was associated with a 3-fold odds for being a case (OR: 3.0; 95 percent CI: 0.8-11.4). Microbiological investigation ----------------------------- The microbiological investigations at the National Reference Centre for Salmonella and other Bacterial Enteric Pathogens at the Robert Koch Institute (RKI, national public health institute) and the CL for HUS included serotyping, testing for Shiga toxins, other phenotypic and genotypic markers and molecular subtyping (PFGE and WGS). We applied a threshold of more than 10 alleles difference to securely exclude isolates from the outbreak [1]. Raw reads of the index case are available for download at under the study accession number PRJEB20962. Molecular typing revealed close relatedness between isolates from 14 confirmed cases. The probable case had a PCR-positive stool sample sharing outbreak specific markers but culturing from stool was unsuccessful. Of the possible cases, all 3 EHEC enteritis and 4 of the 12 HUS cases were positive for EHEC O157, without any further typing. For the remaining 8 HUS cases, isolates were not available. Food safety investigations -------------------------- State food safety authorities conducted inspections and sampling at minced meat producing plants supplying supermarket chain X and others. All results of official samples on production sites, retail level and from regional monitoring programs have been negative for SF EHEC O157 so far. Trace-back investigations starting from locations where cases had purchased minced meat or hot dog-style (Vienna) sausages are ongoing. Discussion ------------- We report an ongoing, protracted and geographically dispersed outbreak of HUS and gastroenteritis in Germany caused by SF EHEC O157:H-. The supra-regional occurrence of cases makes a food item the most likely vehicle of transmission. Based on the investigations to date, we suspect packaged minced meat (beef and pork mixed) sold at one or several supermarket chains, as the most likely source. Other food items purchased at supermarket chains, in particular pre-packaged hot-dog style (Vienna) sausages, cannot be excluded as vehicle at this moment in time, but appear to be less plausible mainly for 2 reasons: less cases can be explained by this exposure compared to minced meat and the sausages are heated during the production process and therefore contamination appears less likely. SF EHEC O157:H- was first described in Germany in 1988 [2] and subsequently caused several outbreaks in Germany [3-5] and elsewhere in Europe [6,7]. SF EHEC O157 is characterized by a high pathogenicity [8,9]. One of the patients in the present outbreak died, and all 10 HUS cases whose parents were interviewed needed intensive care and dialysis. Few secondary gastroenteritis cases among family members were observed. Similarly to previously described outbreaks caused by SF EHEC O157, this outbreak spanned several months and cases were geographically dispersed [4,5]. Little is known about the SF STEC O157 reservoir. In previous investigations, the pathogen was found in cattle and reindeer [10-12]. In other outbreaks, SF EHEC O157:H- infections were epidemiologically linked to the consumption of mortadella (Italian-style sausage) and smoked pork pat\u00e9 [5] or to visiting one particular playground [3]. SF EHEC O157 was isolated from minced beef products in an outbreak involving 18 HUS cases in France in 2011 [6]. In an outbreak associated with a recreational farm visit in Finland in 2012, unpasteurized milk was the most likely vehicle and isolates from patients' stool samples, cattle and the farm environment were identical [7]. At this point, investigations focus on minced meat as outbreak vehicle, although the available evidence is weak. The source of the contamination with SF EHEC O157 is so far unknown. For minced meat, contaminations at the farm, slaughterhouse or subsequent production steps, are all possible options. It is thus conceivable that several retail outlets may be concerned. One limitation in the investigation of this outbreak is that the number of interviewed confirmed cases is small and therefore, results of the case-control study should be interpreted with caution. For a number of HUS cases, no isolate was available and there was no opportunity of laboratory confirmation. In order to identify outbreak cases and allocate them appropriately, diagnostic laboratories and public health services are requested to send any EHEC isolate from HUS patients to a typing center. The use of genomic methods is desirable as routine for characterizing all isolates. A further limitation is that for a substantial proportion of cases, typing and interviews could not be conducted at all, or only weeks after symptom onset. Physicians, diagnostic laboratories, including national reference and consultant laboratories, public health and veterinary authorities at local, state and federal level, should be aware that timely actions are crucial for early detection of the vehicle and source. Several previous investigations into outbreaks with SF EHEC O157 have been unsuccessful in identifying the source, despite intensive efforts of health and food safety authorities [3-5]. This is the largest outbreak of SF EHEC O157 in Germany since 2002 [4] and it has lasted for more than 4 months already. We assume that the source of infection may still be active and further cases may still occur. According to the feedback obtained via the Epidemic Intelligence Information System (EPIS) of the European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control (ECDC), the German outbreak strain has not been detected in other European countries. In Germany, continued epidemiological investigations, sampling of food isolates and trace-back of food items are needed and ongoing to identify the cause of the outbreak. References ----------- 1. Mellmann A, Bletz S, B\u00f6king T, et al: Real-time genome sequencing of resistant bacteria provides precision infection control in an institutional setting. J Clin Microbiol. 2016;54: 2874-2881. 2. Karch H, Wiss R, Gloning H, Emmrich P, Aleksi\u0107 S, Bockem\u00fchl J: [Hemolytic-uremic syndrome in infants due to verotoxin-producing Escherichia coli]. Dtsch Med Wochenschr. 1990;115: 489-495. 3. Nielsen S, Frank C, Fruth A, et al: Desperately seeking diarrhoea: outbreak of haemolytic uraemic syndrome caused by emerging sorbitol-fermenting shiga toxin-producing Escherichia coli O157:H-, Germany, 2009. Zoonoses Public Health. 2011;58: 567-572. 4. Alpers K, Werber D, Frank C, et al: Sorbitol-fermenting enterohaemorrhagic Escherichia coli O157:H- causes another outbreak of haemolytic uraemic syndrome in children. Epidemiol Infect. 2009;137: 389-395. 5. Ammon A, Petersen LR, Karch H: A large outbreak of hemolytic uremic syndrome caused by an unusual sorbitol-fermenting strain of Escherichia coli O157:H-.J Infect Dis. 1999;179: 1274-1277. 6. King LA, Loukiadis E, Mariani-Kurkdjian P, et al: Foodborne transmission of sorbitol-fermenting Escherichia coli O157:[H7] via ground beef: an outbreak in northern France, 2011. Clin Microbiol Infect. 2014;20: 1136-1144. 7. Jaakkonen A, Salmenlinna S, Rimhanen-Finne R, et al: Severe outbreak of sorbitol-fermenting Escherichia coli O157 via unpasteurized milk and farm visits, Finland 2012. Zoonoses Public Health. 2017. DOI: 10.1111/zph.12327 PMID: 28045227 8. Werber D, Bielaszewska M, Frank C, Stark K, Karch H: Watch out for the even eviler cousin-sorbitol-fermenting E. coli O157. Lancet. 2011; 377: 298-299. 9. Pollock KG, Locking ME, Beattie TJ, et al: Sorbitol-fermenting Escherichia coli O157, Scotland. Emerg Infect Dis. 2010;16: 881-882. 10. Orth D, Grif K, Dierich MP, W\u00fcrzner R: Sorbitol-fermenting Shiga toxin-producing Escherichia coli O157: indications for an animal reservoir. Epidemiol Infect. 2006;134: 719-723. 11. Zweifel C, Fierz L, Cernela N, et al: Characteristics of Shiga Toxin-Producing Escherichia coli O157 in Slaughtered Reindeer from Northern Finland. J Food Prot. 2017;80: 454-458. 12. Bielaszewska M, Schmidt H, Liesegang A, et al: Cattle can be a reservoir of sorbitol-fermenting shiga toxin-producing Escherichia coli O157:H(-) strains and a source of human diseases. J Clin Microbiol. 2000;38: 3470-3473. [Authors: Vygen-Bonnet S, Rosner B, Wilking H, et al] -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail [As a review, the classical enterohemorrhagic _E. coli_ is the O157:H7 serotype although some are non-motile, ie, H-. Most O157 strains do not ferment sorbitol and that characteristic was used to screen for the strain using a sorbitol MacConkey agar. However, since non-O157 EHEC strains such as O26, O45, O103, O111, O121, and O145 do ferment sorbitol and, as seen here, some O157 also ferment sorbitol, laboratories now look for these isolates using genetic assays for the Shiga toxin genes. Around 1903 Smith and Reagh reported on the different behavior of salmonella strains. Their work was mostly ignored until Weil and Felix, working on _Proteus_ cultures, noted 2 forms, the swarming form called the H form (_mit Hauch_, in English: \"with breath\") and the non-swarming form, called the O form (_ohne Hauch_, in English: \"without breath\"). The H form contained both O and H antigens (correctly termed the OH form). These parallels were transposed to other enterobacteriaceae. If O antiserum is added to a culture, motility is preserved, whereas if H antiserum is added the culture does not move. Therefore, H antigen was involved with swarming in the agar plate (breathing might have been used to imply the ability to move). (_E. coli_, of course, do not swarm on certain agar plates like _Proteus_ bacteria do). - Mod.LL A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  .] [", "ORF / CONTAGIOUS ECTHYMA, HUMAN - UK: (WALES) ********************************************* A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Mon 22 May 2017 Source: Daily Mail [summarised, edited] A [23 y female] from Rhyl, North Wales, visited a farm in Denbighshire with her boyfriend on 8 Apr 2017 to see the lambs. She took videos and pictures of her cuddling one of the cute new arrivals - but 5 days later she started getting sharp pains in her thumb. Despite being given antibiotics by out-of-hours medical staff at Glan Clwyd Hospital, who said she had an infection called paronychia, her thumb became more swollen and a puss-filled blister formed. [The patient] ended up being admitted to hospital on Easter Monday, where she was then told she had contracted Orf disease. Now she is warning others of the dangers of an apparently harmless activity. \"I was sick with the pain - it felt like my thumb was going to pop, \" she told the Daily Post Wales. \"The vein in my arm was bright red and the doctor said the infection had got into my blood. Next thing I knew I had about 9 doctors with masks on and they were taking pictures of my thumb. \" She was called in to see a surgeon the following day and her thumb had become so swollen local anesthetic didn't work and a decision was taken to operate to halt the infection's spread. \"They said they had never seen anything like it before, then they said I had to go to theatre,\" she continued. \"When I woke up in recovery the nurse said they'd drained it and shaved some of the bone off because it had become infected. They told me if I had left it another day it probably would have caused sepsis (blood poisoning).\" Orf, also known as contagious pustular dermatitis, is a pox carried by sheep and goats and normally causes a lesion or mark which gets better on its own. In very rare cases it can form pustules on the skin which can require surgery to remove them. [The patient] is still taking antibiotics a month after her operation and needs 2 more steroid injections before she can be signed off by her doctor. \"I will never go near another lamb as long as I live, \" she said. \"I wouldn't wish it on my worst enemy - it was so painful. But I can't fault the treatment I had because they rushed me through. \" She also wants to spell out the dangers it could pose to children. She said: \"I want people to be aware of this. I was embarrassed about how it looked but children do go to petting zoos and handle sheep and goats and parents need to be aware.\" What is orf disease? -------------------- Orf is a viral skin disease that can be spread to humans by handling infected sheep and goats. In humans, the 1st sign of orf is a small, red, itchy or painful lump (lesion) that usually appears on the fingers, hands, forearms or face after an incubation period of 3 to 5 days. In some cases there may be more than one lesion. The lesion will usually be firm, red or blue in colour and 2-5cm in diameter. As the condition progresses over a 3- to 6-week period, a pustule or blister that weeps fluid will develop on top and eventually crust over. Other possible symptoms include a mild fever, general tiredness and enlarged lymph glands. Orf is a zoonotic disease (zoonosis), which means it can pass between animals and humans. It's not possible for humans to pass the virus on to each other. The virus is spread by handling infected sheep or goats, infected carcasses, or contaminated material. Handling infected animals near their mouth is thought to increase the risk of orf. Orf is a self-limiting disease, which means it will get better on its own without treatment. It usually clears up within 3 to 6 weeks. [Byline: Keiligh Baker] -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail [The diagnosis of the described case was based upon circumstantial evidence and the clinical observations, and was most likely to be correct. Contagious ecthyma (CE, orf) can be confirmed by electron microscopy of fluid from the lesion; however, this technique cannot distinguish the orf virus from other parapoxviruses. Polymerase chain reaction assays can give a definitive diagnosis. Serology and the detection of viral antigens are not ordinarily used for diagnosis. _Orf virus_, a member of the genus Parapoxvirus in the family _Poxviridae_, is the cause of contagious ecthyma (CE), a highly contagious zoonotic viral skin disease that affects sheep, goats and some other ruminants. CE has been found worldwide in all countries that raise sheep. In the United States, this disease is seen most often in the Western states. In animals, CE causes skin lesions which are painful and often occur on the mouth and muzzle (the so-called buccal form), where they can cause anorexia or even starvation. The initial signs are papules, pustules and vesicles, found on the lips, nose, ears and/or eyelids and sometimes on the feet or perineal region. Lesions can also occur inside the mouth, particularly in young lambs. The skin lesions eventually develop into thick, brown, rapidly growing scabs over areas of granulation, inflammation and ulceration. The scabs are often friable and bleed easily. Nursing lambs can transmit the virus to their dam, resulting in lesions on the teats and udder (genital form). Young animals may refuse to nurse. Foot lesions (podal form), the least common presentation of CE, are usually located on the pain-sensitive coronary bands causing transient lameness. Uncomplicated infections usually resolve in one to four weeks. Secondary bacterial infections can occur and, in rare cases, the lesions may extend into the internal organs. Although CE usually resolves spontaneously and the mortality rate is generally low, fatality rates up to 20 percent, mainly in offspring, have been reported. CE vaccines contain live virus prepared from dried scabs or propagated in tissue culture. The duration of immunity after vaccination is controversial; outbreaks have occurred in vaccinated animals, but vaccine breaks may be due to the virulence of the strain. The vaccine can infect humans. Recently vaccinated animals can also transmit infections to humans. In humans, CE is most common among people who are in close contact with sheep and goats, such as herders, sheep-shearers, veterinarians, butchers and abattoir workers. With the proliferation of petting farms and agrotourism in recent years, a steadily increasing number of infections in patients from urban background, particularly children, have been observed. Incomplete anamnestic inquiry of such patients may lead to misdiagnosis. Lesions of uncomplicated disease in humans heal, in most cases, spontaneously in 3 to 6 weeks without scarring. Secondary infections can occur but are rather rare. No deaths have been reported. Human-to-human transmission is nonexistent or very rare. Large lesions refractory to treatment can occur in people who are immunosuppressed. Unusually large lesions have also been reported in people with atopic dermatitis. Rare cases involving the eye, as well as a generalized vesiculopapular rash on the skin and mucosa, have also been reported. Possible complications include toxic erythema, erythema multiforme and bullous pemphigoid. Generally, when attending CE in humans, surgical approach deserves to be avoided as far as possible. Supportive, conservative treatment explicitly preferred. Pictures of clinical CE cases in animals and humans can be viewed at  . - Mod.AS A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  .] [", "CHOLERA, DIARRHEA AND DYSENTERY UPDATE (37): AFRICA *************************************************** A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases In this update: Africa [1] Cholera - Sudan [2] Cholera - South Sudan (Tonj State) [3] Cholera - Kenya [4] Cholera - Ethiopia, Somalia ****** [1] Cholera - Sudan Date: Thu 25 May 2017 Source: All Africa, Radio Dabanga report [edited] Cholera continues to spread in Sudan's eastern states, with more fatalities and infections reported across White Nile state, North Kordofan and Sennar. The federal authorities are beginning to respond, however Khartoum continues to refer to the outbreak as 'acute watery diarrhea'. The official Sudan News Agency (SUNA) reports that Sudan's First Vice-President and National Prime Minister, Lt. Gen. Bakri Hassan Salih, has given a directive to provide \"all necessary means for containing the watery diarrhea cases in the White Nile state through urgent and effective interventions\". Salih met with Minister of State for Health, Dr Ferdos Abdulrahman at the Republican Palace on [Wed 24 May 2017], to discuss health situations in the country and in the White Nile in particular and efforts of the Federal Ministry of Health in this connection. Dr Abdulrahman affirmed in press statements a decrease of cases in many localities of the State due to efforts of Federal State Health Ministries and partners. She appreciated support provided by the Governor of White Nile State to health teams working for combating the disease. White Nile ---------- However, these official statements are widely contradicted by reports reaching Radio Dabanga from the areas affected by the disease, which repeated tests according to WHO standards show to be cholera. There have been calls to declare a State of Emergency. The Governor of the White Nile, Abdelhameed Kasha, says 53 people have died in the state. In a statement to the Council of States in Khartoum on [Tue 23 May 2017], Kasha said 2755 people and 129 villages have been infected in the 'watery diarrhea' epidemic. The Sudanese Doctors' Central Committee announced the death of 40 people and infection of more than 1800 people with 'acute watery diarrhea' in the White Nile in the recent weeks. In a statement on [Wed 24 May 2017], the committee confirmed the spread of the epidemic to the outskirts of Khartoum and El Gezira states amid deterioration in the health conditions, government secrecy in dealing with the disease and neglecting the known health procedures. The Committee announced spread of the disease in Asalaya, El Duweim, Kosti, Rabak, El Gitena, El Gezira Aba, El Jabelein and Tendelti in White Nile state The Committee called on the State and Federal Ministry of Health to officially acknowledge the existence of a health disaster in the White Nile State and take health isolation measures. On [Tue 23 May 2017], the Governor of the White Nile said that he cannot announce a State of Emergency because that is not his mandate which must be done by the WHO. Governor Kasha said also that currently, White Nile state hosts 122 000 South Sudanese refugees in 8 camps and 50 000 others in various areas in the state. Kosti ----- Journalists reported to Radio Dabanga that the medical isolation centre at Kosti Ophthalmology Hospital received 26 new cholera cases yesterday, [Wed 24 May 2017]. Tahir Ishag El Doma told Radio Dabanga from Kosti that the medical isolation centre of Block 54 in the town received 56 new cases on [Wed 24 May 2017]. He explained that the high rate of infection has prompted the authorities to open a new medical isolation centre at the Abushareef district in the town where the centre received 18 new infection cases on [Wed 24 May 2017]. He explained that the government began to deal with the disease by providing intravenous solutions and mobilizing the medical staff. El Gezira Aba ------------- The head of civil society organizations, Abdelrahman El Siddig, reported the death of 5 people of cholera in villages in El Gezira Aba on [Tue 23 and Wed 24 May 2017]. He told Radio Dabanga that on [Wed 24 May 2017], the number of hospitalized rose to 40. There is a shortage of medical staff and Asalaya hospital is overcrowded with patients. He said police have been deployed to the areas where pumps are drawing water from the Nile to prevent people from using it. El Siddig called on the authorities to close the factories that dispose of their waste in the Nile. El Obeid -------- El Obeid hospital in North Kordofan has received 55 cases of acute watery diarrhea during the week. Dr Amer Adam, the deputy family medicine specialist and head of the hospital's doctors committee told Radio Dabanga that he attributed the outbreak of the disease to the contamination of drinking water and vegetables. Dr Adam called for banning the vegetables coming from White Nile state. He pointed out to the transmission of infection to the city from the White Nile state. He called on the authorities to chlorinate drinking water, provide intravenous solutions, prepare the newly opened isolation centre and raise awareness of people of the dangers of the spread of the disease. Sennar ------ Yesterday, [Wed 24 May 2017], workers in the health sector told Radio Dabanga that cholera is increasing in the areas of Mazmum and Abuareef in Sennar state. A worker in the health sector said that Mazmum area recorded 2 new cases of the disease at a time Abuareef health centre was overcrowded with patients yesterday, [Wed 24 May 2017]. He confirmed that the total number of deaths from cholera at Abuareef area has amounted to 6 cases since the beginning of May 2017. -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts ****** [2] Cholera - South Sudan (Tonj State) Date: Wed 24 May 2017 Source: Gurtong.net [edited] The Minister of Health in Tonj State, Lual Adhal has said cholera has killed more than 20 people in the last 2 weeks in Tonj State while detected cases are on daily basis increasing with admissions of 135 more at different localities. \"A total of 4 emergency serving centers have now been opened in Palieng, Makuac, Mabara and Paweng to deal with the reporting cases and number of admitted patients\", said Adhal. \"We in the State and the national government are in coordination with the Red Cross and UNICEF in providing medical support to the health centres,\" he said. Adhal said last week, in Makuach County, Rialjok Akuecbeny 6 people in a cattle camp died from cholera, while 6 others with signs and symptoms of cholera were admitted at Marial-Lou hospital. He said that 62 people have been affected so far in Makuac Payam and 32 others in Mabara village while 16 in Paweng bringing the total to 135 in the State. [Byline: James Deng Dimo] -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail ****** [3] Cholera - Kenya Date: Wed 24 May 2017, 3:00 pm Source: The Star [edited] A total of 4 people have died from cholera since the outbreak earlier in May 2017, the Health ministry has reported. Medical services director Jackson Kioko said the 4 were among a total of 146 infected people. This was figure as at [Sun 21 May 2017]. Kioko said the 1st 2 cases were reported in Mathare, Nairobi where a total of 21 cases and 1 death have been recorded. There are 88 cases in Garissa, 15 cases and 2 deaths in Vihiga, 2 cases in Mombasa, a case in Kiambu and 11 cases and a death in Murang'a. \"Some of the cases reported in Nairobi, Mombasa and Vihiga are associated with a wedding in Karen over a week ago,\" Kioko said in a statement on [Wed 24 May 2017]. The director said the government is working with counties and partners to end infections. Health workers were asked to keenly monitor suspected cases, follow cholera management guidelines and set up treatment centers. The ministry has also heightened surveillance for acute watery diarrhea by conducting active case searches and contact tracing. \"We are also carrying out awareness on prevention and control [through measures such as] treating or boiling of water, use of latrines for safe disposal of fecal matter and early treatment of any signs of diarrhea,\" Kioko said. Other various measures include: - Reactivating the Multi-Sectoral Outbreak Management Technical Working Group and Rapid Response Teams, both at the national level and in affected counties. - Urging the public to take the initiative of drinking plenty of water with oral rehydration salts when they experience diarrhea. - Provision of water treatment chemicals, laboratory supplies and information on the disease. - Strengthening law enforcement; county environmental health officers have been asked to close or issue closure notices to hotels or eating premises that do not meet basic hygiene standards. - Strengthening the diagnostic capacity at the national and sub-national level, including county referral hospitals. [Byline: Nancy Agutu] -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts ****** [4] Cholera - Ethiopia, Somalia Date: Thu 25 May 2017 Source: Outbreak News Today While the cholera epidemic rages in Yemen with more than 32 000 cases reported since the beginning of the month [May 2017], across the Gulf of Aden, the 2 largest countries on the Horn of Africa are also battling increases in the gastrointestinal bacterial infection. In Somalia during the 1st 4 months of the year, 36 066 suspected cholera cases, including 697 deaths (CFR: 1.9 percent). The areas most heavily affected include Bay, Bakol and Lower Shabelle, Middle Juba and Gedo, all in the south. This compares to 15 619 suspected cholera cases including 531 deaths in all of 2016. In neighboring Ethiopia since the beginning of the year [2017], a total of 33 145 acute watery diarrhea (AWD) cases and 776 deaths (CFR 2.3 percent) have been reported in the country from 6 regions of Somali, Oromia, Amhara, Afar, SNNP and Tigray. A total of 91 percent of these cases and 99 percent of the deaths were reported in Somali Region. Fortunately, the WHO says the outbreak situation in Somali region has greatly improved following the upgrading of the event and subsequent scaling up of response interventions. Access to safe water has increased to large populations including provisions of other essential health care services. Because of the ongoing humanitarian crisis in the Horn of Africa- Gulf of Aden region, resulting in disruptions in water supplies and sanitation, and in the displacement of populations to overcrowded camps, the number of cholera cases detected each week may remain high or even increase, the European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control (ECDC) states. [Byline: Robert Herriman] -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts [The mortality from cholera and most diarrheal illnesses is related to non-replacement of fluid and electrolytes from the diarrheal illness. As stated in Lutwick LI, Preis J, Choi P: Cholera. In: Chronic illness and disability: the pediatric gastrointestinal tract. Greydanus DE, Atay O, Merrick J (eds). NY: Nova Bioscience, 2017 (in press) oral rehydration therapy can be life-saving in outbreaks of cholera and other forms of diarrhea: \"As reviewed by Richard Guerrant et al. (1), it was in 1831 that cholera treatment could be accomplished by intravenous replacement, and, although this therapy could produce dramatic improvements, not until 1960 was it 1st recognized that there was no true destruction of the intestinal mucosa, and gastrointestinal rehydration therapy could be effective, and the therapy could dramatically reduce the intravenous needs for rehydration. Indeed, that this rehydration could be just as effective given orally as through an orogastric tube (for example, refs. 2 and 3) made it possible for oral rehydration therapy (ORT) to be used in rural remote areas and truly impact on the morbidity and mortality of cholera. Indeed, Guerrant et al. (1) highlights the use of oral glucose-salt packets in war-torn Bangladeshi refugees, which reduced the mortality rate from 30 percent to 3.6 percent (4) and quotes sources referring to ORT as \"potentially the most important medical advance\" of the 20th century. A variety of formulations of ORT exist, generally glucose- or rice powder-based, which contain a variety of micronutrients, especially zinc (5). \"The assessment of the degree of volume loss in those with diarrhea to approximate volume and fluid losses can be found in ref. 6 below. Those with severe hypovolemia should be initially rehydrated intravenously with a fluid bolus of normal saline or Ringer's lactate solution of 20-30 ml/kg followed by 100 ml/kg in the 1st 4 hours and 100 ml/kg over the next 18 hours with regular reassessment. Those with lesser degrees of hypovolemia can be rehydrated orally with a glucose or rice-derived formula with up to 4 liters in the 1st 4 hours, and those with no hypovolemia can be given ORT after each liquid stool with frequent reevaluation.\" References ---------- 1. Guerrant RL, Carneiro-Filho BA and Dillingham RA. Cholera, diarrhea, and oral rehydration therapy: triumph and indictment. Clin Infect Dis. 2003;37(3):398-405. 2. Gregorio GV, Gonzales ML, Dans LF and Martinez EG. Polymer-based oral rehydration solution for treating acute watery diarrhoea. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2009;(2):CD006519. doi: 10.1002/14651858.CD006519.pub2. 3. Gore SM, Fontaine O and Pierce NF. Impact of rice based oral rehydration solution on stool output and duration of diarrhoea: meta-analysis of 13 clinical trials. BMJ 1992; 304(6822): 287-91. 4. Mahalanabis D, Choudhuri AB, Bagchi NG, Bhattacharya AK and Simpson TW. Oral fluid therapy of cholera among Bangladesh refugees. Johns Hopkins Med. 1973; 132(4): 197-205. 5. Atia AN and Buchman AL. Oral rehydration solutions in non-cholera diarrhea: a review. Am J Gastroenterol. 2009; 104(10): 2596-604, doi: 10.1038/ajg.2009.329. 6. WHO. The treatment of diarrhoea, a manual for physicians and other senior health workers. 4th ed. 2005. - Mod.LL A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  .] [", "SEAL FINGER - CANADA: (BRITISH COLUMBIA) **************************************** A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Thu 25 May 2017 Source: NBC News [edited] The family of the Canadian girl, who was dragged into the water by a sea lion over the weekend and is being treated for a related infection, is speaking out for the first time. The dramatic video of the sea lion grabbing the girl's dress and pulling her into the sea as she sat on a Richmond, British Columbia, pier on [Sat 20 May 2017] quickly went viral. An older man who appeared to be a relative jumped into the water and quickly rescued her. The girl's father credits the older relative's quick-thinking with saving her life. \"If he had 1- or 2-second doubt about that, my girl could have been gone by then. That reaction, makes him a hero,\" the girl's father said in an interview with the Canadian Broadcasting Corporation. Days later, the Vancouver Aquarium urged the girl's family to get her help because she was possibly in danger of a hazardous infection known as \"seal finger\". \"The family saw media reports in which our marine mammal trainer recommended they call us, and they did get in touch.\" Vancouver Aquarium spokeswoman Deana Lancaster told NBC News. \"She did get a superficial wound and she's going to get the right treatment.\" While some have blamed the ordeal on the girl's parents, and claims have been made that they were feeding the sea lion, the family denies the accusations. \"There was somebody beside them that was trying to feed them. Also, they weren't trying to take pictures or anything,\" the father said. A bite from a seal or a sea lion is quite different from that of a terrestrial animal because it carries a host of bacteria uncommon to land mammals, experts say. \"Seal finger\" can be caused by bacterium called _Mycoplasma phocacerebrale_, which must be treated promptly with tetracycline antimicrobials, Canadian researchers reported in 2009. Seal finger causes the affected area to swell up and look like it is practically inflated. It tends to affect the hands because that is where seal trainers, sealers, vets and biologists are wont to be nipped by the animal -- although it can also come from cuts on the hand while working with seal meat. \"If any member of our animal care team receives a bite from a sea or sea lion, they take a letter from our vet with them to the hospital, which explains that the infection is resistant to some antibiotics,\" Lancaster said. While it is more easily treated now, sealers historically lost their fingers or even their hands sometimes because of the disease. As the young girl receives treatment for the bite wound, her father said he is happy she is safe and has learned a lesson. \"Only thing I care is God, she is safe. I could have gone organizing a funeral by now rather than doing interview,\" he said. [Byline: Phil McCausland] -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail [The following is extracted from \"White CP and Jewer DD: Seal finger: A case report and review of the literature. Can J Plast Surg. 2009;17: 133-135\" showing the abstract and discussion (citations available at original source  ): Abstract -------- A recent case of seal finger which was misdiagnosed and hence mistreated at the patient's 1st presentation is described. The patient was eventually referred to a hand specialist and after the correct treatment with tetracycline, responded well without any long-term sequelae. Seal finger is an occupational injury that occurs to those who work directly or indirectly with seals. The disease entity has been described in both Scandinavian and Canadian literature. The causative microorganism was unknown until 1991, when _Mycoplasma phocacerebrale_ was isolated from both the finger of a patient with seal finger and from the mouth of a seal that bit the patient. Although rare, the disease is not uncommon in marine workers, biologists and veterinarians. Prompt identification based on patient history and treatment with oral tetracycline is pendant to a favourable patient outcome Discussion ---------- Seal finger was 1st described by Bidenknap in 1907 (2). In the 1st half of the 20th century it was common in Norway and Newfoundland sealing fleets, where an estimated 10 percent and 2.5 percent of the sealers were affected, respectively (3). It most commonly occurred in people who either hunted or handled seal meat (4). Later in the 20th century many of those affected with seal finger were researchers and veterinarians (5). Traditionally, seal finger most commonly affected the middle and index finger because of the practice of placing these 2 digits through the eye slits of seal pelts to drag them along the ice. Even from the earliest records, the disease entity was described as a painful, swollen, stiff, erythematous finger with possible axillary lymphadenopathy. Laboratory investigations show increased white blood cell count with neutrophilia (4,6,7). X-rays are usually normal in the acute stage (7) but eventually may show joint destruction (5). The entrance of infection is through epithelial deficiency, or weakness of skin barrier (4,8). The incubation period is reported to be from 7 to 15 days (9). Naming schemes for the disease include in English, seal finger or sealer's finger, and in Norwegian, 'spekkfinger' or 'speak finger', which means 'blubber finger'. In the Baltic seas, the term 'salrota', which means 'seal rot', is used. In the Gulf of Finland, other synonyms include 'salen I fingret', which means 'the seal in the finger', or from other translations 'seal blood in the finger', 'blubber in the finger' and 'blubber poisoning' (8). Seal hunters and seal meat handlers are most likely to get the infection on the index or middle finger of the nondominant hand because this hand tends to get accidentally cut by the knife being used in the dominant hand (9,10). Those actually bitten by a seal tend to have the thumb of the dominant hand affected (5,11). These patients tend to be researchers and wildlife workers. The differential diagnosis includes erysipeloid, atypical mycobacteriosis (12) and _Vibrio vulnificus_ infection (13). In erysipeloid, the erythema is much more intense and the causative organism _Erysipelothrix rhusiopathiae_ can be cultured quite easily (5). Infection with atypical mycobacteria also causes less pain than seal finger but is known to be very difficult to culture with normal methods (4). Numerous case reports tell of adverse outcomes from the infection after incorrect treatment. These usually include the immediate consequences of pain, discomfort, decreased function and, in the long term, may include stiffness and permanent loss of finger joint range of motion (5). Other long-term consequences include ankylosis of interphalangeal joints, severe pain on movements or marked sensitiveness to cold. Surgical treatment for these problems included arthrodesis or amputation (4). It was not uncommon that a patient at sea on a fishing voyage would demand amputation of a finger to avoid losing valuable working time and wages (9). Histological pathology reveals perivascular infiltration with lymphoctes and plasma cells in subcutaneous adipose tissue, and a few granulocytes without pus or necrosis. Fibrosis eventually takes place (4). Grossly joint pathology can be seen. Involved joints show severe inflammatory reaction with chronic granulation tissue and scarring with destruction of the articular cartilage (5). Seals (_Pinnipedia_ suborder) are classified as either eared, earless or walruses. The Canadian seal hunt includes harp seals (_Pagophilus groenlandicus_), the hooded seal (_Cystophora cristata_), the harbor seal (_Phoca vitulina_) and the grey seal (_Halichoerus grypus_), all which are hunted for their fur pelts (14). Harbor seals are earless and the most common associated with seal finger. Other types of sea mammals have been implicated in seal finger including elephant seals (_Mirounga leonine_) (5,13) and sea lions (7). There are numerous case reports of patients being unsuccessfully treated with initial 1st line antimicrobials (15). The consequences of incorrect choice antibiotics is usually an extended course of treatment (6), loss of recovery time and numerous consultations (7), unnecessary invasive procedures (17) and permanent damage to the joint (11,12). One of the main reasons for incorrect treatment is possibly \"lack of awareness by primary physicians of seal finger as a clinical entity\" (5). The link between seals and _Mycoplasma_ was not proven until 1991. _Mycoplasma_ species were first isolated from the trachea, bronchus, lung and heart in diseased harbor seals (_Phoca vitulina_) during an epizootic outbreak of seal pneumonia along the New England sea board in 1979 and 1980. The _Mycoplasma_ strain was classified as the new species _Mycoplasma phocidae_ (19,20). Later, in 1988 and 1989 in the Baltic Sea and North Sea during another mass mortality of seals, 2 new species - _M phocacerebrale_ and _M phocarhinis_ - were identified (21). The discovery of _Mycoplasma_ species in epidemics of seal disease prompted researchers to explore the possibility of _Mycoplasmas_ as a cause of seal finger. They isolated _M phocacerebrale_ from the finger of an aquarium trainer who was bitten by a seal and also from the biting seal (1,18,22). The isolates from the seal's mouth and the patient's finger were the same. The isolates were also identical to the Baltic Sea _Mycoplasma_ strain _M phocacerebrale_ but not the same as the New England strain _M phocidae_ (18,23). This observation by Madoff et al (21) in 1991 was the 1st documented case of _Mycoplasma_ as the causative agent of sealer's finger. _Mycoplasma_ species are known to cause both arthritis and be passed from one species to another (24). Past traditional treatments of sealer's finger included dressing the affected digit with camphor oil, wheat flour paste and alcohol, soap with washing soda, and hot water (3). Other things like vinegar, brine, hot ash lye, linseed, pitch oil, rye flour, fur resin, pork slices and bear gall were also used. Other treatments have included magic spells recited over the finger, and stroking the tip of the finger with a feather from the left wing of a grouse (8). Treatments used in Canada included heat, splinting and amputation (9). Other treatments such as heat soaks, drainage and injections of penicillin were also used (10). Prophylactic techniques included hand washing with brine, petroleum, simple sap and wearing gloves (8). Early reports noted the effectiveness of chlortetracycline (aureomycin) for the treatment of seal finger (8,10). Treatment regiments of 16 to 18 doses of aureomycin 250 mg every 6 h for 10 days were used (9). There are documented cases of the infection's resistance to antimicrobials including dicloxacillin, penicillin (5) and cephalexin (7,15). Patients with seal finger respond to tetracycline (5,7,15). Current recommended treatment for seal finger is tetracycline 1.5 g immediately and 0.5 g orally 4 times a day for 2 to 6 weeks (5,12) or 1 g twice daily intravenously (11,18). It was thought that because _Mycoplasmas_ lack a cell wall, the disease does not respond to beta-lactam antimicrobials (13). - Mod.LL A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  .] [", "ANTIBIOTIC RESISTANCE (04): CANADA, FOSFOMYCIN, FOSA7 GENE, SALMONELLA, CHICKENS ******************************************************************************** A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Tue 23 May 2017 Source: Center for Infectious Disease Research and Policy (CIDRAP) [edited] A team of Canadian scientists has identified a gene that confers resistance to the broad-spectrum antibiotic fosfomycin, according to a study yesterday [Mon 22 May 2017] in Antimicrobial Agents and Chemotherapy [1]. The gene, dubbed fosA7, was found in 15 _Salmonella enterica_ isolates from broiler chickens in British Columbia. The isolates were of the _Salmonella_ Heidelberg serotype, which is commonly identified in poultry and has become one of the leading causes of salmonellosis in humans. In recent years, Heidelberg strains have become more resistant to antibiotics, limiting therapeutic options. The gene was also found in 3 other _Salmonella_ serotypes--Agona, Montevideo, and Tennessee. Although polymerase chain reaction (PCR) testing showed that the gene was exclusively located on the chromosome of the _Salmonella_ Heidelberg isolates, the concern is that fosA7 could potentially be spread to other strains of _Salmonella_ and other families of bacteria if transferred to plasmids--small, floating pieces of DNA that can be shared among bacteria through a process known as horizontal gene transfer. \"If it's on the chromosome, and it jumps to the plasmid, and the plasmid gets into another [type of bacteria], then the situation becomes worse,\" corresponding author Moussa Diarra, PhD, a research scientist with Agriculture and Agri-Food Canada, told CIDRAP News. Increased use of fosfomycin in human and veterinary medicine would then increase the prevalence of the gene. To see whether fosA7 could be transferrable, the scientists made a clone of the gene and copied it onto a plasmid inserted into a sample of the _Salmonella_ serotype Enteritidis. Antibiotic susceptibility tests on the modified Enteritidis strains showed that a more than 256-fold increase in the minimum inhibitory concentration (MIC) of fosfomycin was needed to prevent growth of the bacteria. \"These results further suggest the fosA7 is responsible for fosfomycin resistance and if transferred on plasmids, it can induce a high level of resistance in the recipient bacterial strain,\" the authors write. Fosfomycin is an older, well-tolerated antibiotic with activity against both gram-positive and gram-negative bacteria. It has been used to treat a variety of human infections, including urinary tract infections, and is considered a safe alternative for treating infections caused by multidrug-resistant bacteria, including those caused by _Salmonella_. The existence of a gene that could lead to the failure of fosfomycin would be highly problematic. \"It's an important antibiotic,\" Diarra said. \"If we have resistance to it, too, then [treatment] becomes complicated.\" As a result, Diarra and his colleagues call for \"vigilant monitoring\" for the spread of fosfomycin resistance in bacteria isolated from humans and animals. Nontyphoidal _Salmonella_ causes an estimated 1.2 million foodborne illnesses and about 450 deaths each year in the United States, according to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. The agency's most recent estimate of antibiotic-resistant _Salmonella_ infections put the burden at 6200 cases annually. [1. Rehman MA, Yin X, Persaud-Lachhman MG and Diarra MS. First Detection of a Fosfomycin Resistance Gene fosA7 in _Salmonella enterica_ serovar Heidelberg Isolated from Broiler Chickens. Antimicrob Agents Chemother. Posted online 22 May 2017. doi: 10.1128/AAC.00410-17] [Byline: Chris Dall] -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail Rapporteur Mary Marshall [The following is the abstract of the journal article referenced in the news report above: \"ABSTRACT --------- \"We previously described _Salmonella_ Heidelberg harbouring a chromosomal gene cluster similar to the glutathione S-transferase gene, a putative fosA conferring resistance to fosfomycin. Here we show that this new gene named fosA7 confers resistance to fosfomycin. Introduction of fosA7 into fosfomycin susceptible _Salmonella_ Enteritidis resulted in a substantial increase in the fosfomycin MIC. This finding increases awareness of antibiotic resistance in _Salmonella_ Heidelberg from broiler related to the food safety and public health.\" Fosfomycin, a natural bactericidal, broad-spectrum antibiotic discovered in 1969, has been available for clinical use in many European countries as well as Japan, South Africa, and Brazil, in both oral and parenteral formulations, for up to 4 decades ( ). In the United States and Canada, only an oral formulation is available for clinical use for the past 2 decades to treat uncomplicated urinary tract infection as a single oral dose ( ). Fosfomycin is not widely used in veterinary medicine except in countries in Central and South America ( ). Fosfomycin irreversibly inhibits phosphoenolpyruvate transferase, an enzyme that catalyzes the 1st step of peptidoglycan synthesis of microbial cell walls. It is not structurally related to other classes of antimicrobial agents and thus does not exhibit cross-resistance with other classes of antibiotics. Fosfomycin resistance mechanisms include reduced permeability, modification of the gene target, and modification of fosfomycin by enzymes such as fosA, fosB, fosC, and fosX, several of which are encoded on plasmids ( ). Fosfomycin-resistant determinants integrated into mobile genetic elements such as plasmids could facilitate rapid spread of fosfomycin resistance if selected by increasing use of fosfomycin; and, if fosfomycin resistance is genetically linked to resistance to other antibiotics on mobile genetic elements, fosfomycin resistance could be co-selected by other antibiotics ( ). Fosfomycin resistance is currently rare in the United States ( ). Because of increasing rates of antibiotic resistance of _E. coli_ to current standard empiric antibiotic regimens, fosfomycin is now being recommended for the 1st-line empirical oral treatment of community-acquired uncomplicated urinary tract infections ( ,  ). However, the plasmid-encoded fosA3 gene, similar to those found in China, where fosfomycin resistance was said to be commonly described, has already been reported in a patient in Pennsylvania, USA ( ). - Mod.ML A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  .] [", "BOVINE TUBERCULOSIS - UK (02): (ENGLAND) BOVINE *********************************************** A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Thu 25 May 2017 Source: The Ross Gazette [edited] Robert Davies, of Hopes Ash Farm, in Hope Mansell, near Ross-on-Wye, has told the Gazette that the farm is in the grip of a devastating bovine tuberculosis (bTB) outbreak, but he feels it is important to share his experience with the local community. Mr Davies told the Ross Gazette that he had kept a diary where he outlined what was happening at the farm and how the loss of the cattle, which had been part of their herd for many years, affected the family, emotionally and financially. So far, 27 in-calf heifers have been destroyed, 22 tested positive for bTB in an initial test, and 5 others have since tested positive. Although there is compensation available, Mr Davies said this is not enough to replace these high-quality home-bred cows, and their unborn calves. Mr Davies wants to raise awareness, to those without experience of farming, of how overwhelming the battle against bTB is. He has met with DEFRA and bTB advisors and hopes that he has done as much as he can to highlight the situation. He commented: \"The futile battle faced by farmers every day is largely unreported and one which I believe the general public should be made more aware of.\" Oliver Cartwright, NFU spokesman, has told the Ross Gazette that Bovine TB remains a huge threat to Herefordshire's beef and dairy industry. He commented: \"It has been proven without doubt that badgers are a reservoir of bTB and that the disease transmits between badgers and cattle.\" \"Controlling the disease in wildlife, therefore, in areas where it is rife, is an absolutely vital part of any package of measures if we are to successfully get on top of it and stop reinfection occurring.\" Mr Cartwright continued: \"The NFU will continue to make the case to the next Government on this issue which is having such a devastating impact in the county.\" [Byline: Catherine Barkley] -- Communicated by: ProMED-MBDS from HealthMap Alerts [On top of the serious losses incurred by bTB to cattle and the farming industry, this zoonotic bacterium has affected, on UK farms, alpacas. It is transmissible to pets, challenging humans (see http://promedmail.org/post/20140327.2361967). In Oct 2016, DEFRA published a document addressing \"11 questions about bovine tuberculosis\", which is available at According to statistics released in late April 2017 by the Irish Department of Agriculture, Food and the Marine, the amount of cattle that have been slaughtered for bovine TB had increased during the 1st 3 months of 2017: a total of 2849 animals were culled in total, up 252 compared to the same time in 2016. This translates to a herd incidence rate of 2.60 percent nationally for the start of 2017, which is up from 2.39 percent for the same period in 2016. (see at  ). - Mod.AS A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  .] [", "FOOT & MOUTH DISEASE - ISRAEL (03): (HAZAFON) BOVINE, SEROTYPE A, SPREAD, OIE ***************************************************************************** A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Thu, 25 May 2017 Source: Israel's State Veterinary Services website [summ., edited] Foot & mouth disease in Israel - OIE follow-up report 1 ------------------------------------------------------- Date of report [submission to the OIE]: 25 May 2017 Date of start of the event: 1 May 2017 Causal Agent: Foot and mouth disease virus Date of confirmation of the event: 8 May 2017 Serotype(s): A Location: Qela, Golan, HaZafon Start date [current, 2nd outbreak]: 22 May 2017 Clinical signs: yes Species / Susceptible / Cases / Deaths / Killed and disposed of / Slaughtered Cattle / 68 / 1 / 0 / 0 / 0 Affected population: vaccinated herd. Free ranging cattle. 50 dams and 18 calves. Mouth lesions have been observed in one of the dams. no limping was observed. Epidemiology Epidemiological comments: the virus of the outbreak in Arab el Aramshe [immediate notification, see  ] is an A strain from the Genetic lineage A/ASIA/G-VII(G-18). In the outbreak of Qela [current event], the strain is A and the lineage is still pending. Last time that A strain was diagnosed in Israel was in 2009 [see comment]. Measures applied: movement control inside the country; vaccination in response to the outbreak; screening; quarantine; zoning Diagnostic test results Name of laboratory: National Foot and Mouth Disease Laboratory, Kimron Veterinary Institute, Beit-Dagan. Species / Test type / Date / results Cattle / real-time PCR / 23 May 2017 / Positive [The location of the 1st, initial outbreak and the current, 2nd outbreak of this event can be seen in a map at the source URL above.] -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail [The follow-up report no 1 above is also available at FMD has a seasonal pattern in Israel, with May being, during most recorded events, the peak month. Most FMD outbreaks, throughout the years, were caused by FMDV serotype O. Typically, this serotype affected both large and small ruminants (cattle, sheep, goats) and spread widely among unvaccinated animals. FMDV serotype A outbreaks were reported in the years 1965, 1971, 1979, 1981, and 2009. While the outbreak in 1965, caused by FMDV serotype A22 which spread at that time throughout the Middle East, affected all parts of the country and all susceptible species, the events in 1979 and 1981 were limited to cattle, affecting grazing beef-type cattle, and were limited to the north-east (Golan heights, bordering Lebanon and Syria). The 2009 event, caused by FMDV-A topotype ASIA, genotype 'Iran-05BAR-08', affected cattle and sheep and spread throughout northern Israel. It was found identical to strains from Libya, Iran, and Iraq. According to initial genotyping of the virus isolated from the 1st outbreak (Aramshe) of the current evolving event, the strain involved was genotyped by the national laboratory as lineage A/ASIA/G-VII(G18). Confirmation from WRLFMD and genotyping results of the current case in Qela (likely, identical) are pending. This virus is, most probably, currently circulating in Lebanon and probably also in Syria/other countries in the region. A recent FMD event involving several locations in the Palestinian authority (West Bank) is yet to be serotyped and, hopefully, genotyped (see archive no. http://promedmail.org/post/20170516.5039513). For the above and additional information on FMD in Israel, please refer to Israel's page on the WRLFMD website, at  . The precise location of Qela can be seen at  (zoom out for regional orientation). - Mod.AS] [", "LEISHMANIASIS, CUTANEOUS - NEPAL ******************************** A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Wed 24 May 2017 10:30 PM NPT Source: The Himalayan Times [edited] [DL], 32, had gone to Dolpa [Province Six] in 2016. After staying there for about 3-4 months he was back in Kathmandu on [11 Oct 2016]. Upon his return, he noticed blisters on his nose and cheeks. Dismissing it as pimple, he bought a pimple cream from a local pharmacy in Bhaktapur but the cream didn't work. Rather the size of the blisters increased. In an attempt to treat it, he squeezed making them more reddish, and the shape changed too. So, he visited a hospital in the Capital [Kathmandu] where he was given medicines for tuberculosis. But that medicine worsened the infection. Later he was referred to Sukraraj Tropical and Infectious Disease Hospital, Teku [Kathmandu] and its Consultant Tropical Medicine Physician Dr Anup Bastola diagnosed it as 'cutaneous leishmaniasis'. \"It was quite an unusual skin infection. After some tests it was discovered that he was suffering from cutaneous leishmaniasis,\" the doctor informed. \"Leishmaniasis is caused by the protozoan leishmania parasites. They are transmitted by the bite of an infected female phlebotomine sand flies. And among the 3 main forms of leishmaniasis, [DL] was diagnosed with the most common one -- cutaneous leishmaniasis, CL. There are about 20 species of _Leishmania_ that may cause cutaneous leishmaniasis.\" As per Dr Bastola, this is an emerging disease in the country. He informed, \"The cases of cutaneous leishmaniasis have been seen in areas like Dharan [Province One], Makwanpur and Dhading [Province Three], Tanahun [Province Four], Nepalgunj [Province Five], and Dolpa [Province Six] in the country. From 2016 till February 2017, 4 such cases have been identified in the Teku-based hospital. In addition, 8 cases have also been reported from the far western development region while 2 cases from Dharan.\" As an emerging disease, they are still researching about the species of _Leishmania_ that is infecting people here. The infection is transmitted by infected phlebotomine sand flies. \"Sand flies become infected by sucking blood from an infected animal or person. As the parasites are found in rodents, these sand flies feed on them and when they bite a healthy person, they transmit the infection,\" Dr Bastola shared. Nepal has a favourable climate for its survival, the sand flies are found here too, which puts people at risk.  \"When someone is infected with leishmaniasis, a red lesion starts as a papule or nodule at the site where the sand fly has bit. It grows slowly and increases in size. In the early stage it seems to be like a pimple,\" clarified Dr Bastola. He added, \"A crust develops centrally. The patient feels mild itching in the infected area, red juicy plaque-like crusting too are likely to appear. However, at times it can be asymptomatic and can be destructive too. It depends upon the species of leishmania you are infected with.\" With the medicines and diagnostic tools currently available in the country, adequate control of leishmaniasis is possible, Dr Bastola said. However, he insisted that dermatologists must be aware about the infection in advance so that they can diagnose the disease in its early stages. For others, the doctor advised to \"keep surroundings clean, try not to come out in the evenings unless necessary, wear full sleeved clothes, not to forget to use mosquito repellents to be safe from the bites of sand flies\". -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts [Leishmaniasis is endemic in Nepal. Visceral leishmaniasis is endemic in a few provinces in Southern Nepal bordering India, with one district reporting 5-10 cases per 10 000 population and the rest 1-5 or less than one (see map and graphs with annual reported number of cases at ), and cutaneous leishmaniasis (CL) is very rare (see archive no. http://promedmail.org/post/20161002.4531103). The _Leishmania_ from a previous case of cutaneous leishmaniasis in Nepal was typed as _L. major_. Cutaneous leishmaniasis in the Western Himalayas is known to be caused by. _L. major_ and _L. donovani_ (Katakura K: Molecular epidemiology of leishmaniasis in Asia (focus on cutaneous infections). Curr Opin Infect Dis. 2009; 22(2): 126-30; abstract available at  ). Cutaneous leishmaniasis is common in Afghanistan and Pakistan, but was until recently considered rare in Indian Kashmir. However, a study from 2015 reported a new focus of CL in the Kashmir Valley (Wani GM et al: Clinical study of cutaneous leishmaniasis in the Kashmir Valley. Indian Dermatol Online J. 2015; 6(6): 387-92); available at  . The present report of many cases of CL in the Kathmandu valley indicates that CL has spread further from Kashmir into Nepal. - Mod.EP Maps of Nepal can be seen at  and  . - Sr.Tech.Ed.MJ] [", "FOODBORNE ILLNESS - NEPAL: (DHADING) RELIGIOUS CEREMONY ******************************************************* A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Thu 25 May 2017 From: Sher Bahadur Pun [edited] On 23 May 2017, as many as 50 people from AdamTar-6, Dhading district [Province Three], fell ill after consuming food (Prasad) in a ceremony known as Shradh Puja. On 24 May 2017, 22 of them, were admitted to Sukraraj Tropical and Infectious Disease Hospital (STIDH), while remaining patients are also expected to reach to STIDH soon. According to patients, close to 100 relatives participated in the ceremony on that day. Symptoms such as watery diarrhea, vomiting, stomach pain, headache, fever developed 8-12 hours after eating Prasad. They are now in stable condition and are currently under medical care. Every year, several foodborne outbreaks are reported in Nepal. However, identification of the cause of these outbreaks has never been attempted or achieved by the concerned authorities. -- Dr Sher Bahadur Pun, MD, PhD Clinical Research Unit Sukraraj Tropical and Infectious Disease Hospital Kathmandu Nepal [As written by Dr Pun who ProMED thanks for his submission, it is not likely that an etiology will be identified, but with fever associated with vomiting and diarrhea, an etiology such as salmonellosis may be behind the episode. Bacterial toxin associated enteric diseases, such as those linked to _Staphylococcus aureus_ or _Clostridium perfringens_, are not generally associated with fever. - Mod.LL Maps of Nepal can be seen at  and  . - Sr.Tech.Ed.MJ] [", "WHEAT VIRUSES - USA: (KANSAS) ***************************** A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Fri 19 May 2017 Source: World Grain [edited] Kansas Wheat has identified another significant threat to the 2017 crop -- wheat streak mosaic virus (WSMV). Alerting growers, [they] said the disease is \"crippling western Kansas wheat crop.\" Kansas State University said 6 counties are indicating widespread incidence of WSMV and related viruses -- High Plains mosaic and triticum mosaic. \"Many fields in this area are severely diseased and could experience more than 70 per cent yield loss, if not a complete loss,\" the Wheat Commission said. \"The rest of western Kansas is dealing with high distributions of these diseases while the central region is also seeing high and moderate infection levels.\" US Department of Agriculture said damage may not yet be fully reflected. \"Due to the widespread severity, it is difficult to take it all in account because there isn't a year to compare it to. It seems to be getting worse by the day and we anticipate the weekly reports to reflect that. Also, fields can be affected even if it isn't showing symptoms until combines get in.\" [Byline: Josh Sosland] -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail [_Wheat streak mosaic virus_ (WSMV; genus _Tritimovirus_) can infect wheat, maize (some cultivars), grasses, as well as oats and barley in experimental inoculations. Heavy WSMV infection can cause complete crop failure in wheat. Symptoms usually appear in warmer weather and may include yellow blotches, streaks and mottling on leaves, as well as severe stunting, excessive tillering and possibly death of plants. WSMV has also been reported as synergistic partner, in the Americas and Europe, to cause maize lethal necrosis (MLN) in co-infection with _Maize chlorotic mottle virus_ (MCMV, genus _Machlomovirus_, transmitted by chrysomelid beetles). WSMV is spread by the wheat curl mite _Aceria tosichella_. Larvae acquire the virus by feeding on infected plants and remain infectious for approximately a week. Field distribution of symptoms is closely related to the dispersal of the vector; for example, margins of fields are often affected first. The virus is not transmitted congenitally to the progeny of the vector. WSMV can also be mechanically transmitted and seed transmitted at a low level. Control of the mite vector is difficult but disease management may include controlling volunteer wheat and grassy weeds to minimise inoculum from the previous season via a 'green bridge'. _Triticum mosaic virus_ (TriMV; genus _Poacevirus_) was discovered in 2006 in the USA in WSMV resistant cultivars. Further research on its host range and epidemiology is needed. High plains disease is caused by _High Plains wheat mosaic virus_ (HPWMV; genus _Emaravirus_) and can affect wheat, maize and related grasses. For both viruses, symptoms on wheat are similar to WSMV. All 3 viruses share the wheat curl mite vector and may occur singly or in mixed infections. Disease management may include control of vector and virus reservoirs, but relies mainly on use of cultivars with increased levels of resistance. However, development of crop varieties with stable resistance to multiple viruses is particularly difficult since each pathogen can be expected to mutate independently resulting in a range of changing combinations of strains. An outbreak of _Soil-borne wheat mosaic virus_ (SBWMV; genus _Furovirus_) is currently also being reported from elsewhere in the US (see link below). This virus is transmitted by the soil-inhabiting fungus _Polymyxa graminis_ and causes one of the few diseases of winter wheat that can destroy an entire crop of a susceptible cultivar (for more information see previous ProMED-mail posts in the archives). Maps USA: Individual states via: Pictures WSMV leaf symptoms:  ,  ,  , and Maize lethal necrosis: and TriMV symptoms: High plains disease:  (on wheat) and (on maize) Wheat curl mite: and Links Additional news stories:  ,  , and SBWMV, Washington State: WSMV and vector information:  ,  ,  , and WSMV description: Information on maize lethal necrosis: and High plains disease: and Information on TriMV, WSMV and HPWMV: Wheat curl mite molecular taxonomy: Virus taxonomy via: - Mod.DHA] [", "SEAL FINGER - CANADA (02): (BRITISH COLUMBIA) COMMENT ***************************************************** A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Fri 26 May 2017 Source: GIDEON (Global Infectious Disease Epidemiology Network) [edited] A recent case of \"seal finger\" in Canada complements an increasing number of zoonotic bacterial diseases associated with animal bites. The following list is extracted from Gideon  (primary references available on request): _Bacteroides pyogenes_: case of bacteremia following a cat bite. _Bacteroides tectus_: cat bites _Bergeyella zoohelcum_: dog-bite infection Bisgaard's taxon 16 [_Pasteurella_-like organisms: Mod. LL]- animal bite wounds _Canibacter oris_: dog-bite infection _Capnocytophaga canimorsus_: dog-bite infection _Capnocytophaga cynodegmi_: dog-bite infection _Corynebacterium canis_: dog-bite infection _Corynebacterium freiburgense_: recovered from a dog-bite _Corynebacterium kutscheri_: implicated in cases of animal-bite infection CDC NO-1: dog- and cat-bite wounds _Dietzia cinnamea_: dog-bite infection _Erysipelothrix rhusiopathiae_: related to contact with animals/fish or their products _Frederiksenia canicola_: dog-bite infection _Fusobacterium canifelinum_: animal-bite wounds _Halomonas venusta_: fish-bite infection _Kingella potus_: wound from a kinkajou _Mannheimia glucosida_: infected lamb-bite _Moraxella canis_: dog-bite infection _Mycobacterium vulneris_: dog-bite infection _Mycoplasma phocicerebrale_: seal-bite infection (\"seal finger\") _Neisseria animaloris_: animal-bites _Neisseria canis_: animal-bite infection _Neisseria weaveri_: animal-bite infection _Neisseria zoodegmatis_: animal bite infection _Pasteurella aerogenes_: wound infections _Pasteurella caballi_: horse-bite infection _Pasteurella canis_: dog-bite infection _Pasteurella dagmatis_: cat- and dog-bite infection _Pasteurella multocida_: animal-bite infection _Pasteurella stomatis_: animal-bite infection _Porphyromonas macacae_: cat-bite infection _Psychrobacter immobilis_: animal-bite infection _Staphylococcus intermedius_[/_pseudointermedius_: Mod.LL]: animal-bite infection _Vibrio harveyi_: shark-bite infection -- Communicated by: Stephen Berger Geographic Medicine Tel Aviv Medical Center Tel Aviv, Israel [ProMED thanks Steve Berger for his continued contributions to our posts. - Mod.LL] [", "CHOLERA, DIARRHEA AND DYSENTERY UPDATE (38): ASIA (YEMEN) ********************************************************* A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases [1] Date: Fri 26 May 2017 Source: Outbreak News Today [edited] About 10 000 cholera cases and nearly 100 deaths have been reported in war-torn Yemen since our last report earlier this week [ ]. According to a press release Thu 25 May 2017 the WHO reported that an aircraft carrying 67 tons of intravenous fluids and cholera kits has successfully landed at Sana'a airport, noting this is the largest planeload of medical goods WHO has brought into the country since the escalation of the conflict in March 2015. \"Flying a jumbo jet into a war zone is not easy,\" said Dr Nevio Zagaria, WHO Representative in Yemen. \"You need the agreement of the parties to the conflict to ensure the plane is not accidentally caught up in the crossfire. We're thankful for their cooperation in allowing these life-saving supplies to reach the people of Yemen. We are also thankful for logistical support from the World Food Programme that allowed us to charter the plane.\" The supplies, sufficient for the treatment of 10 000 patients, are a welcome boost to the country's response to a cholera outbreak which has caused more than almost 70 000 suspected cases since it began in October 2016. The epidemic had shown signs of slowing but recently reignited, causing 42 207 suspected cases and 420 deaths between 27 Apr 2017 and 24 May 2017. This has been reported in 74 percent (17/23) of the governorates. Most of the cases have been reported in the western governorates. The 4 most affected governorates were Amanat Al Asimah, Hajjah, Sana'a, and Amran, according to WHO. WHO continues to work with local health authorities and partners to scale up the response to the disease. 14 new diarrhea treatment centres have been set up across the country, in addition to the 26 treatment centres established during the 1st wave of the outbreak. WHO is also scaling up the network of oral rehydration points for the treatment of mild and moderate cases of dehydration. WHO is also helping to run the national and governorate emergency operations centres, supporting the disease surveillance system, and providing medicines and cholera treatment in the affected districts. Prior to Thursday's [25 May 2017] delivery, WHO had already distributed more than 28 cholera kits, sufficient for the treatment of 2800 people, and more than 115 000 bags of intravenous fluids for the rehydration of severely affected cases. A further 13 tons of supplies for the cholera response in the country's southern governorates will travel to Aden via ship. -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail ****** [2] Date: Thu 24 May 2017 Source: The Guardian [edited] Malnutrition, lack of clean water, and a conflict that has destroyed infrastructure and hampered access to medical supplies have allowed the epidemic to escalate, according to those coordinating the aid response. \"This is the 2nd wave of cholera we have seen here recently, and it is spreading at an alarming rate,\" said Nevio Zagaria, head of mission in Yemen for the World Health Organization (WHO). Speaking from the capital, Sana'a, Zagaria said: \"We had an outbreak that started in October 2016 and which declined in January 2017. Now, in the last month, we have seen more cases in 3 weeks alone than in the previous 6 months.\" Since 27 Apr 2017, there have been 329 deaths and 32 056 confirmed new cases, according to the latest figures. Of those, 16 percent are among children under 5 and 20 percent among children aged 5 to 14. \"We have started an investigation to determine whether a new and more virulent strain of the cholera, perhaps originating in Somalia or Ethiopia, has been generating a higher mortality rate during this 2nd wave of infection,\" said Zagaria. Samples have already been collected by the WHO for testing in Paris. Experts hope the results can help them understand how the disease has been spreading. The immediate forecast is grim, however. Even by the most conservative estimates, there will be 150 000 cases of cholera within the next 6 months, said WHO statisticians. Yemen has a population of almost 27 million. With food shortages and hunger spreading, the UN estimates nearly 19 million people are in need of help. Among the most vulnerable are the undernourished. Medics on the ground said children are dying from a preventable disease because they lack supplies to treat them. In Sana'a -- the epicentre of the outbreak, with 8000 cases -- one doctor said his hospital had been receiving more than 100 suspected cases an hour. Dr Mohammed Zaid said: \"I personally received 180 cases in one day. People are left lying in the corridors and in some cases we are having to put 6 children in one bed. \"We are urging the international organizations to scale up their response. We are facing so many challenges: we lack medicines and medical supplies, we do not have enough doctors and nurses. We don't even have a place to wash our hands.\" Cholera, an acute diarrheal infection, is spread through contaminated food or water but can be effectively treated with the immediate replacement of lost fluids and salts. Without treatment it can lead to death in just a few hours, even for healthy adults. 3/4 of people infected with the disease display no symptoms, but the pathogens remain in their feces for 7 to 14 days, meaning they can infect others. Cholera can spread very quickly, especially in areas where there is overcrowding and poor sanitation. Experts in Yemen said a shortage of trained medical staff had led to misuse of the limited supply of intravenous fluids. Amid the political upheaval and violence, health workers already on extremely low salaries are no longer being paid. With the capital under rebel control since February 2015, the government has moved to the southern port city of Aden. Since March 2015, Saudi Arabia has led a US-backed military intervention aimed at reinstating the ousted president, Abd-Rabbu Mansour Hadi, and countering the advances of the Iran-backed Houthi forces. \"Medical professionals haven't been paid for months,\" said Mark Kaye, a humanitarian adviser for Save the Children. \"What we are seeing now in Yemen is a man-made disaster. As well as the latest outbreak of cholera potentially belonging to a more aggressive strain, there is a lack of systems in place to deal with the crisis. Facilities are being destroyed or damaged due to fighting. We can provide support on the frontline, but it's merely a sticking plaster. Only once there is a peace process can we get aid to the sick and hungry and start to rebuild the institutions that have been damaged or destroyed.\" [Byline: Hannah Summers] -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts ****** [3] Date: Wed 24 May 2017 13:07 IRDT Source: Tasnim News Agency [edited] Director of a medical center in Yemen said cholera bacteria may have been spread in the war-torn country intentionally, as the World Health Organization has reported dramatic increases in cholera cases there. Earlier in May 2017, Yemen's Health Ministry declared a state of emergency in Sana'a in connection with the epidemic. International organizations, including the United Nations and the Red Cross, say the Saudi-led war on Yemen and an embargo against the country may be responsible for the cholera epidemic. The Saudi aggression has taken a heavy toll on the poor country's facilities and infrastructure, destroying many hospitals, schools, and factories. Since March 2015, the Saudi regime has been engaged in a brutal campaign against Yemen in an attempt to reinstall Abd Rabbuh Mansur Hadi, the president who resigned and is a staunch ally of Riyadh. The campaign also aims to crush the Houthi Ansarullah movement. The Saudi regime has failed to achieve its objectives. Director of the Azal Medical Center, Dr Yahya Al-Hamdani, has suggested that the bacteria behind the outbreak may have been spread intentionally from the air, Press TV reported. \"The most important reasons for the aggression are that they have sprayed toxic gases from the air; and hidden forces have worked on the spread of the epidemic,\" he said. Another doctor at the center, Yousra Sourai, said that they are having difficulties dealing with the influx of patients diagnosed with cholera. \"We were receiving more than 500 cases at the medical complex. We did not know how we could receive these cases, with the shortage of medicine, nurses and doctors,\" she said. -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail [The dramatically increasing numbers are listed below: Date (2017) / Cases / Deaths 8 May / 1360 / 25 11 May / 2752 / 51 13 May / 8595 / 115 14 May / 11 000 / 180 17 May / 17 200 / 209 19 May / 23 500 / 242 21 May / 29 300 / 315 22 May / 35 217 / 361 24 May / 42 207 / 420 In 7 days, the number of reported cases has risen from 23 500 to 42 207 and the deaths from 209 to 420. Whether the strain involved has increased virulence is unclear at this point but the dreadful conditions in the country and lack of adequate care can account for some of the numbers. Formally, the 2 established biotypes of _Vibrio cholerae_ O1, classical and El Tor, can be distinguished from one another by a number of phenotypic properties including hemolysis of sheep red blood cells, agglutination of chicken red blood cells, the Voges-Proskauer reaction, as well as susceptibility to polymyxin B and to biotype-specific viral bacteriophages. Hybrid biotypes, so-called Matlab variants, are also described (Nair GB, Faruque SM, Bhuiyan NA, et al: New variants of _Vibrio cholerae_ O1 biotype El Tor with attributes of the classical biotype from hospitalized patients with acute diarrhea in Bangladesh. J Clin Microbiol 2002; 40(9): 3296-3299; abstract available at ). These strains are associated with a higher percentage of symptomatic cases. There is no evidence that the spread of cholera in Yemen is deliberate at this point. Regarding cholera as a biological weapon: \"During World War II, the Japanese biological weapons program known as Unit 731 located in Pingfan Manchuria (24 kilometers south of Harbin) experimented with _Vibrio cholera_ as a weapons agent. It was reported that the Japanese dropped cholera and typhus cultures into more than 1000 Chinese wells and reportedly caused 10 000 cases in 1941. However, an estimated 1700 of the deaths were Japanese soldiers, a testimony to the difficulty of protecting one's own troops from biological agents and controlling infections. South Africa's biological weapons program, Project Coast (1981-1994), under the direction of Colonel Wouter Basson, developed cholera as a possible biological agent. It was reported that during South Africa's civil war, cholera, anthrax and other bacteria were released into water in rebel-held areas. Iraq's biological weapons program reportedly began with the start of the Al-Hazen Institute in 1974 where cholera was one of the biological agents under study. North Korea reportedly also studied cholera as a possible biological weapons agent.\"  - Mod.LL A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  .] [", "INFLUENZA (12): INDIA (HIMACHAL PRADESH), H1N1PDM09, ASSOCIATED FATAL CASES *************************************************************************** A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Thu 25 May 2017 04:07 IST Source: The Hindu [edited] The number of patients who are reporting positive for Swine flu is increasing every day in the State. After the death of a Maharashtra tourist - [AP] -- last week [week of Sun 14 May 2017] some tourists in Manali also tested positive for influenza. Many patients have been admitted in the Tanda Medical College hospital in Kangra and the IGMC hospital in Shimla. An elderly person died in Dehra because of swine flu a few days ago. As many as 35 patients have died in the last couple of years due to swine flu and more than 250 patients were treated after testing positive for swine flu. The State has 2 pathological labs at IGMC, Shimla and RPMC, Tanda where patients are referred from regional and zonal hospitals. -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail [H1N1 influenza is actually a seasonal influenza, as repeatedly mentioned in ProMed mail posts. Although the media regularly refer to the virus as \"swine flu\", the term is misleading. An informative source on H1N1 can be found at  . The associated influenza infection is preventable as the virus is included in the annual influenza vaccine available for humans. The burden of sick and fatal influenza cases can be understood better if proper incidence rates are calculated based on age stratified population data. - Mod.UBA A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  .] [", "JAUNDICE - INDIA: (HIMACHAL PRADESH) ************************************ A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Thu 25 May 2017 04:07 IST Source: The Hindu [edited] Hospitals in the capital town saw an unusual rush over the past week with several hundred people testing positive for jaundice after allegedly consuming polluted water. People from numerous suburbs have now complained about the alleged supply of contaminated and non-chlorinated water by the municipal and IPH authorities here. \"The authorities are not adding the required bleaching powder to the water sources and muddy water is coming from the taps,\" complained a resident who had fallen sick, even as many others echoed his concerns. Bleaching powder or hypochlorite is an inorganic compound used for treating water and is often used by the authorities here. The untimely arrival of rain and a massive hailstorm a few days ago also resulted in the contamination of drinking water sources. More than 20 people died in the State last year [2016] after the Jaundice epidemic started from Shimla. A major drinking water source of the town, Ashwani Khad was found polluted by the nearby sewerage pipelines. -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail [There have been multiple media reports in 2016 and early 2017 [ ] reporting jaundice cases associated with sewage contamination of water source. It is possible that the surge being reported is another outbreak linked to contaminated water reservoirs, which could have been precipitated due to heavy rainfall. Among various infectious causes of jaundice, hepatitis A and hepatitis E viruses are commonly acquired through water. Contaminated water is generally considered the main source of infection. Water may be infected either due to poor personal hygiene of food vendors or to sewage contamination of drinking water. If jaundice occurs in a large population around the same time, we should suspect contamination of the drinking water with sewage water. Infectious jaundice can also develop after drinking contaminated bore well water, or by drinking stream water directly without purification. The spread of water borne infections such as hepatitis A can be reduced by:  - Adequate supplies of safe drinking water;  - Proper disposal of sewage within communities; and  - Personal hygiene practices such as regular hand-washing with soap and safe water. - Mod.UBA A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  .] [", "NOROVIRUS - USA (05): (CALIFORNIA) ********************************** A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Thu 25 May 2017 Source: Outbreak News Today [edited] California state health officials said they are working with local public health departments across the state to help control norovirus outbreaks that have increased in the past few weeks, and are occurring in schools and other institutional settings. \"Norovirus outbreaks usually have an annual peak like we are seeing now. They can be particularly large and disruptive in schools, affecting both students and teachers,\" said CDPH [California Department of Public Health] Director and State Public Health Officer Dr Karen Smith. \"Norovirus is very infectious and can spread rapidly wherever people congregate and share food and bathroom facilities. Fortunately, most people with norovirus infection will recover quickly, usually in 1-3 days.\" In Yolo County, which has been hit very hard by norovirus, announced the Woodland Joint Unified School District (WJUSD), has decided to close Dingle and Tafoya elementary schools on Fri 26 May 2017, to limit further transmission of the norovirus in these 2 schools, which have experienced particularly high rates of the illness. Current reported numbers of affected students and school staff in Yolo County since 1 May 2017 is 3374. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) estimates that there are between 19-21 million cases of norovirus illness each year in the US. Additionally, CDC estimates that norovirus contributes to 56 000-71 000 hospitalizations and 570-800 deaths each year in the US. The spread of norovirus can be prevented by practicing proper hand hygiene. Important strategies include washing hands with soap and water, especially after using the toilet and changing diapers, and always before eating and preparing or handling food. Symptoms of norovirus [infection] include fever, nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, and stomach pain. Symptoms last for 1-3 days. However, after symptoms go away, people are still highly infectious, especially the 1st 48 hours. There is no treatment for norovirus illness. The most important steps to prevent the spread of norovirus is to stay home if you are sick, and for another 48 hours after symptoms go away, and to regularly wash hands. -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail [The state of California can be located on the HealthMap/ProMED-mail interactive map at . Yolo County can be seen on the map at  . - Sr.Tech.Ed.MJ See ProMED mail Norovirus - USA (04): (CA) http://promedmail.org/post/20170513.5034178, which reported 33 cases in students and 5 in teachers early May 2017 in Yolo county, which then increased to 950 cases in Yolo County by 12 May 2017, and now 3374 cases since 1 May 2017, a major increase. In 2013, the BBC reported a new strain of norovirus may have been the reason for the sharp rise in cases the UK observed ( ). A new variant, Sydney 2012, became the dominant strain in England and Wales. Because people were less immune to this new strain, it spread quickly. More than a million people are thought to have had norovirus during that outbreak, 63 percent higher than the same time the prior year. Perhaps a change in viral strain is also the reason the outbreak in California is so large this year. In the US, between September 2013 and August 2016, 2715 genotyped norovirus outbreaks were submitted to CaliciNet. GII.4 Sydney viruses caused 58 percent of outbreaks during these years. Acquisition of alternative RNA polymerases by recombination is an important mechanism for norovirus evolution and a phenomenon that was shown to occur more frequently than previously recognized in the US. The authors concluded that continued molecular surveillance of norovirus strains, including typing of both polymerase and capsid genes, is important for monitoring emerging strains in continued efforts to reduce the overall burden of norovirus disease (excerpted from Cannon JL et al: Genetic and epidemiologic trends of norovirus outbreaks in the US demonstrated emergence of novel GII.4 recombinant viruses, 2013-2016. J Clin Microbiol. 2017; pii: JCM.00455-17. doi: 10.1128/JCM.00455-17; abstract available at  ). - Mod.LK A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  .] [", "HENDRA VIRUS, EQUINE - AUSTRALIA (04): (QUEENSLAND) *************************************************** A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Fri 26 May 2017 2:23 PM Source: Warwick Daily News [edited] Queensland has confirmed it is managing a new hendra virus case in a horse in Queensland. A press release issued this afternoon [Fri 26 May 2017] said the positive test result from the horse in the Gold Coast Hinterland area had been received last night [Thu 25 May 2017]. Queensland Chief Biosecurity Officer Dr Jim Thompson said one horse had been euthanized on the property after rapid deterioration. \"Tracing and risk assessments are being undertaken on any animals that may have had contact with the infected horse to work out if further testing needs to be done,\" Dr Thompson said. \"We will work with the property owners to ensure the risk is contained on the property.\" Queensland Health's public health experts are assessing the situation today [Fri 26 May 2017] to determine if any humans had contact with the infected horse and will provide any assistance, treatment or testing as the case unfolds. Dr Thompson said this was the 1st case of hendra virus in Queensland this year [2017]. \"Hendra virus infection can occur throughout the year, so it's important that horse owners take steps to protect themselves and their animals at all times,\" he said. \"Vaccination is the single most effective way of reducing the risk of hendra virus infection in horses. It is recommended that horse owners speak to their veterinarian about vaccinating their horses. \" The deceased horse had not been vaccinated for hendra virus. \"If a horse becomes sick, owners should contact their veterinarian immediately. People in contact with horses need to remember to continue to practice good biosecurity and personal hygiene measures even if a horse is vaccinated against Hendra virus.\" For more information on prevention of Hendra virus or biosecurity steps in an incident, visit or call 13 25 23. For information on the vaccine, visit . [Byline: Sophie Lester] -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts [Hendra virus is a zoonotic disease and has killed people, as well as horses. The virus has resulted in an exposed dog being euthanized in an abundance of caution to prevent the family from possible exposure. This article states vaccination is the single most effective way to protect your horses, and it likely helps build a barrier between the disease and humans. - Mod.TG A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  .] [", "POLIOMYELITIS UPDATE (08): GLOBAL (DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF CONGO CIRCULATING VACCINE DERIVED POLIOVIRUS) ******************************************************************************************************* A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Thu 25 May 2017 Source: Polio Eradication Initiative [edited] Poliovirus Weekly Update 24 May 2017, World Health Organization New wild poliovirus cases reported this week: 0 Total number of wild poliovirus cases in 2017: 5 Total number of wild poliovirus cases in 2016: 37 New cVDPV cases reported this week: 4 Total number of cVDPV cases in 2017: 4 Total number of cVDPV cases in 2016: 5 Headlines  - The World Health Assembly (WHA) is meeting this week in Geneva, Switzerland. Ministers of Health and public health professionals from around the world are discussing global public health issues, including the global drive to eradicate polio. The Global Polio Eradication Initiative (GPEI) secretariat has prepared a status report, which will inform the discussions by Member States.  - The Global Polio Eradication Initiative (GPEI) welcomes Dr Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus, the new Director-General-elect of the World Health Organization, and looks forward to working with him to achieve a polio-free world.  - Two separate outbreaks of circulating vaccine derived poliovirus type 2 (cVDPV2) have been reported in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, one in Haut Lomami province and one in Maniema.  - Health Ministers of the Group of Twenty have emphasized the importance of polio eradication and transition planning efforts at their inaugural meeting in Berlin, Germany.  - Polio staff in Nigeria have contributed emergency response expertise to a meningitis outbreak in Sokoto State.  - Summary of newly-reported viruses this week [week of Sun 21 May 2017]: Afghanistan, 1 new wild poliovirus type 1 (WPV1) environmental sample. Pakistan, 7 new WPV1 environmental samples. Democratic Republic of the Congo, 4 new cases of circulating vaccine derived poliovirus type 2 (cVDPV2) and one isolate from a healthy individual in the community. Afghanistan  - No new wild poliovirus type 1 (WPV1) cases were reported in the past week [week of Sun 14 May 2017]. The total number of cases for 2017 remains 3, and for 2016 remains 13. The most recent case had onset of paralysis on 21 February [2017], from Kunduz province.  - One new environmental sample positive for WPV1 was reported in the past week [week of Sun 14 May 2017] in Lashkargah district, Hilmand province, with date of collection on 26 April [2017].  - With most of Afghanistan polio-free, efforts are focused on continuing to strengthen operations, in close coordination with Pakistan, to address remaining low-level transmission in the common reservoir area of the Quetta-Kandahar corridor. Pakistan  - No new wild poliovirus type 1 (WPV1) cases were reported in the past week [week of Sun 14 May 2017]. The total number of WPV1 cases for 2017 remains 2, and for 2016 remains 20. The most recent case had onset of paralysis on 13 February 2017, from Diamir district, Gilgit Baltistan.  - A total of 7 new positive WPV1 environmental samples were reported in the past week [week of Sun 14 May 2017]; 3 in Balochistan province, with 2 in Quetta district and one in Killa Abdullah; 2 in Rawalpindi district, Punjab province; one in Sukkur district, Sindh province; and one in CDA, Islamabad. Dates of collection were between 10 April 2017 and 10 May 2017.  - The year 2016 saw the lowest ever annual number of polio cases in the country but poliovirus continues to be isolated through environmental surveillance over a significant geographical range. Efforts are ongoing through implementation of the national emergency action plan to address remaining gaps in coverage and surveillance, in close coordination with neighbouring Afghanistan. Nigeria  - No new cases of wild poliovirus type 1 (WPV1) were reported in the past week [week of Sun 14 May 2017]. The total number of WPV1 cases for 2016 remains 4 and no cases have been reported in 2017. The most recent case had onset of paralysis on 21 August 2016 in Monguno Local Government Area (LGA), Borno.  - Nigeria continues to implement emergency response to the detected WPV1 strain and circulating vaccine-derived poliovirus type 2 (cVDPV2) strains affecting the country.  - The response is part of a broader regional outbreak response, coordinated with neighbouring countries, in particular the Lake Chad sub-region, including northern Cameroon, parts of Central African Republic, Chad and southern Niger.  - Detection of the polio cases in Nigeria underscores the risk posed by low-level undetected transmission and the urgent need to strengthen subnational surveillance. Lake Chad Basin  - The detection of wild poliovirus type 1 (WPV1) and circulating vaccine-derived poliovirus type 2 (cVDPV2) in Nigeria poses a risk to the neighboring countries of the Lake Chad basin and hence an outbreak response plan is being implemented as part of the response to the Nigeria outbreak.  - Emergency outbreak response efforts continue across the Lake Chad basin, together with activities to fill subnational surveillance gaps across the region. Central Africa  - A total of 2 separate outbreaks of circulating vaccine derived poliovirus type 2 (cVDPV2) have been reported in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.  - In Haut Lomami province, 2 cases of cVDPV2 have been reported, one in Butumba district with onset of paralysis on 8 March 2017 and one in Malemba-Nkulu district on 20 February 2017.  - In Maniema province, 2 cases of cVDPV2 have been reported, one in Kindu district with onset of paralysis on 26 March 2017 and one in Kunda district on 18 April 2017. One additional isolate has been detected in a healthy individual from the community in Kindu district, with the sample collected on 2 May 2017.  - Outbreak response plans are currently being finalized, with supplementary immunization activities using monovalent oral polio vaccine type 2 (mOPV2) in line with internationally-agreed outbreak response protocols. Surveillance and immunization activities are being strengthened in neighboring countries.  - The Democratic Republic of the Congo is also affected by an Ebola outbreak, in Bas Uele province in the north of the country. Coordination among both outbreak response teams will be necessary and teams are already working on this. Officially reported wild poliovirus cases as of 23 May 2017 Total global cases in 2017: 5 (compared with 16 for the same period in 2016) Total in endemic countries in 2017: 5 (compared with 16 for the same period in 2016) Total in non-endemic countries in 2017: 0 (compared with 0 for the same period in 2016)  - Afghanistan: 3 cases in 2017 (compared with 5 for the same period in 2016), onset of paralysis of most recent case: 21-Feb-17  - Pakistan: 2 cases in 2017 (compared with 11 for the same period in 2016), onset of paralysis of most recent case: 13-Feb-17  - Nigeria: 0 case in 2017 (compared with 0 for the same period in 2016), onset of paralysis of most recent case: 21-Aug-16  - Total global cases in 2016: 37  - Total in endemic countries: 37  - Total in non-endemic countries: 0 Officially reported cVDPV cases as of 23 May 2017 Total global cases in 2017: 4 (compared with 3 for the same period in 2016) \u2022- Democratic Republic of the Congo: 4 cases in 2017 (compared with 0 for the same period in 2016), onset of paralysis of most recent case: 18-Apr-17  - Pakistan: 0 case in 2017 (compared with 0 for the same period in 2016), onset of paralysis of most recent case: 17-Dec-16  - Nigeria: 0 case in 2017 (compared with 0 for the same period in 2016), onset of paralysis of most recent case: 28-Oct-16  - Lao People's Democratic Republic: 0 case in 2017 (compared with 3 for the same period in 2016), onset of paralysis of most recent case: 11-Jan-16  - Total global cases in 2016: 5  - Total in endemic countries: 2  - Total in non-endemic countries: 3 -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail [This update confirms that the vaccine derived poliovirus (VDPV) responsible for cases in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (DRC) reported in our last polio update (see Poliomyelitis update (07): Mozambique, Congo DR, VDPV, RFI http://promedmail.org/post/20170525.5060299) was due to a circulating VDPV (cVDPV). The last identification of a cVDPV in the DRC was during the period 2008 to 2012, when there were a total of 64 cases of cVDPV associated polio ( ). The outbreaks of the cVDPV involve 2 provinces in the eastern part of the country - Maniema and Haut Lomami and can be found on a map at:  . It will be interesting to see the results of the genetic sequencing of the involved viruses to see which, if any, are most closely associated with those viruses last identified (geographically), as an obvious question is whether these are related viruses (in the 2 provinces) as well as if they might have been circulating \"silently\" since 2012. - Mod.MPP A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  .] [", "MEASLES UPDATE (29) ******************** A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases In this update: Africa --- [1] Somalia Europe --- [2] UK (England) [3] Europe Pacific --- [4] New Zealand (North Island) USA --- [5] Minnesota ****** Africa --- [1] Somalia Date: Tue 23 May 2017 16:29 Source: Garowe Online [edited] Somali officials have announced that measles outbreak has killed several children in Middle Shabelle region in southern Somalia, Garowe Online reports. Mandheere district was reported to be among areas where measles has spread affecting many young children, according to district official Salah Mohamed Ali. In the last 3 days, several children have fallen ill due to the disease amid lack of proper health services and centers to treat the affected children in the district, added Ali. The official said the sick children couldn't be transferred to the nearest hospitals in Jowhar town, as rains in the past days have blocked main roads leading to Jowhar town. Ali urged Hirshabelle state administration, Somali Federal government and international organizations to provide immediate health response to the victims of the measles outbreak in the region. -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts [See Healthmap/ProMED for map of Somalia  ] ****** Europe --- [2] UK (England) Date: Tue 25 May 2017 14:59 Source: Gloucestershire Live [edited] There were almost 100 cases of measles recorded in the South West [of England] last year [2016] - the highest total since the last outbreak in 2013. The region recorded just 13 measles cases in 2015, but that figure rocketed to 96 in 2016 - making it the 2nd highest region outside London. Last year's total was not as high as in 2013, when there were 163 which was the 2nd-highest on record in data going back to 1996. Measles causes fever, a rash, conjunctivitis and can cause serious complications and even death. Only 7 of the 96 measles cases last year [2016] were in Gloucestershire according to county council stats. But parents have still been warned to make sure their children are vaccinated from the illness. Across the South West, 92.9 percent of children in 2015/16 were given their 1st dose of the vaccine against measles by their 2nd birthday. [Byline: Matt Discombe] -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts [See Healthmap/ProMED for map of England, United Kingdom:  ] ****** [3] Europe Date: Fri 26 May 2017 Source: BBC [edited] Health Minister Hermann Gr\u00f6he said it was necessary to tighten the law because of a measles epidemic. A mother of 3 died of measles in the city of Essen [Germany] this week [week of Sun 21 May 2017]. The government wants kindergartens to report any parents who cannot prove they have had a medical consultation. However, Germany is not yet making it an offence to refuse vaccinations - unlike Italy. Speaking to the popular daily Bild, Mr Gr\u00f6he said: \"Continuing deaths from measles cannot leave anyone indifferent.\" Under the plan, the children of parents who fail to seek vaccination advice could be expelled from their daycare center. The law is expected to be adopted next month [June 2017]. The upper house of the German parliament, the Bundesrat, said forcing kindergartens to report some parents to the health authorities might breach data protection laws. Italy has recorded nearly 3 times more measles cases so far this year [2017] than for all of 2016. Last week [week of Sun 14 May 2017] the Italian government ruled that parents must vaccinate their children against 12 common illnesses before enrolling them at state-run schools. The list includes measles, polio, whooping cough and hepatitis B. By mid-April this year [2017], Germany had 410 measles cases, compared with 325 for the whole of 2016, the Robert Koch Institute reported. The institute said that besides children, all adults born since 1970 should get immunized against measles, if they had not had the measles jab or had had it only once. Last week [week of Sun 14 May 2017] a German court ruled that a father could insist on having his child vaccinated, over the objections of the mother. The case concerned a separated couple, and the child was living with the mother. Italian officials have attacked what they call \"anti-scientific\" theories which have led to vaccination rates falling well below levels deemed safe to prevent outbreaks. Those theories include a long discredited link between autism and the MMR (measles, mumps and rubella) vaccine. A 2010 survey of vaccinations EU-wide and in Iceland and Norway found much variation in policy. The Venice project survey reported that 15 countries had no mandatory vaccinations, and the rest had at least one mandatory vaccination. The level of compliance was high, including in countries where vaccinations were recommended, not mandatory. The report concluded that \"the label 'mandatory' is not the only driver behind achieving a high vaccination coverage, and many other factors can play a role, such as the use of combined vaccines, prices for the recipient, kind of offer, information and promotional campaigns\". The World Health Organization (WHO) says that since the introduction of 2 doses of anti-measles vaccine across Europe the number of cases has dropped sharply. The total in 2016 -- about 5000 -- was the lowest ever recorded. But 14 European countries are described as \"endemic\" for measles, and most cases this year [2017] were reported in 7 of them: France, Germany, Italy, Poland, Romania, Switzerland and Ukraine. The largest outbreaks are in Italy and Romania, the WHO says. The 2nd measles jab needs to be administered to at least 95 percent of the population, the WHO says - a level not reached in the endemic countries. Children should be screened for their measles vaccination history when they start school, and those lacking evidence of receipt of 2 doses should be vaccinated, the WHO says. -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts ****** Pacific --- [4] New Zealand (North Island) Date: Thu 25 May 2017 Source: 1 News Now [edited] Measles case confirmed in Wellington as officials warn disease could spread unless people get checked. Regional Public Health in Wellington has warned a single case of measles identified in the region could lead to more unless people get checked. One person has come down with the disease and Medical Officer of Health Annette Nesdale says anyone who visited the locations [listed in the URL] at the relevant times, and is not immunized, should see their GP. Ms Nesdale explained ...\"We are contacting people who have been in contact with the unwell person because measles is an airborne disease anyone who was at the above listed locations at the times specified, should remain vigilant,\" she said. -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts [See Healthmap/ProMED for map of New Zealand  ] ****** USA [5] Minnesota Date: Wed 24 May 2017 Source: Winona Daily News [edited] It's easy to opt out of vaccination in Minnesota. All you need do is provide a notarized statement saying you don't want your child immunized. That's how the clear majority of kindergartners who skipped the measles vaccine this year [2017] were able to avoid the shot. Only 95 current Minnesota kindergartners didn't get the vaccine because of an allergy or other diagnosed medical problem, according to the state Department of Health. But 1968 kindergartners weren't immunized against measles just because their parents didn't want them vaccinated. When vaccination rates rise, the likelihood of a measles outbreak decreases and the highly contagious disease can be at bay. That said, some parents want the state to make vaccine exemptions more difficult to get. Despite pushes to tighten state vaccine policy, Minnesota lawmakers have shown little inclination to change anything. Rep. Mike Freiberg, DFL-Golden Valley, has a vaccine bill that's repeatedly failed to gain traction in the Legislature. His proposal would require parents to hear a doctor detail vaccine safety information from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention before opting out. He thinks that would go a long way toward increasing immunization rates. \"If you make it at least as inconvenient, frankly, for them to not get vaccinated as it is to get vaccinated and in the process provide them with medically accurate information, then I think it's very likely that they will actually get their children vaccinated,\" Freiberg said. Freiberg hopes the ongoing measles outbreak will persuade lawmakers his bill would improve public health in Minnesota. He said Republicans who control the Legislature have shown a willingness to take a closer look at his proposal next year [2018]. Vaccine opponents in Minnesota promise to fight any steps to make vaccination mandatory. There's a relatively small, but vocal, cadre of groups linking measles vaccination with health problems and autism -- despite widely accepted science to the contrary. Leo Cashman, who heads the Minnesota Natural Health Legal Reform Project, said requiring vaccination tramples on parental rights. \"We are opposed to any attempt to weaken the parental right to choose on the question of the child's vaccinations,\" he said. \"If you make it at least as inconvenient, frankly, for them to not get vaccinated as it is to get vaccinated and in the process provide them with medically accurate information, then I think it's very likely that they will actually get their children vaccinated.\" [Byline: Mark Zdechlik] -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts [There are currently 68 cases of measles reported in Minnesota, almost exclusively in Hennepin County. See ProMED-mail Measles update (27) for earlier update on the outbreak in Minnesota prior to this jump to 68 cases. The cases are almost exclusively in U.S.-born children of Somali descent. The Washington Post reported on 5 May that MMR vaccination rates among U.S.-born children of Somali descent used to be higher than among other children in Minnesota. But the rates plummeted from 92 percent in 2004 to 42 percent in 2014, state health department data shows, well below the threshold of 92 to 94 percent needed to protect a community against measles. [It is concerning] that Wakefield, a British activist who now lives in Texas, visited Minneapolis at least 3 times in 2010 and 2011 to meet privately with Somali parents of autistic children, according to local anti-vaccine activists. Wakefield's prominence stems from a 1998 study he authored that claimed to show a link between the vaccine and autism. The study was later identified as fraudulent and was retracted by the medical journal that published it, and his medical license was revoked. Read the full article from 5 May and see a figure of the plummeting vaccine rate in Minnesota ( ). The state of Minnesota can be located on the HealthMap/ProMED-mail interactive map at . A county map can be seen at  . - Mod.LK] [ A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  .] [", "MERS-COV (29): QATAR, ANIMAL RESERVOIR, CAMELS ********************************************** A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Wed 24 May 2017 Source: State of Qatar, Ministry of Public Health - News [edited] Ministry of Public Health (MOPH) has announced that a new Middle East Respiratory Syndrome Corona Virus (MERS-CoV) case has been confirmed for a 29-years-old, resident in Qatar, marking the 3rd MERS-CoV case to be confirmed in the country this year [2017] and bringing the cumulative number of confirmed MERS-CoV cases since 2012 to 21 cases among whom 7 have died. The patient is a camel worker and had complaints of fever and dry cough for several days. He sought medical attention in Hamad General Hospital where an X-Ray investigation suggested a severe pneumonia. Consequently and as he reported an occupational frequent contact with camels, further samples were withdrawn from the patient. He ultimately tested positive for MERS-CoV according to Hamad Medical Corporation laboratories. Despite his stable condition, the patient was admitted to hospital; in consistence with the national infection prevention and control protocol for confirmed and suspected MERS-CoV cases to ensure the appropriate medical attention. However, neither a history of contact with similar cases nor a recent travel outside the country was reported for the patient who has no comorbidities. Once the case has been confirmed, the rapid response team of the Health Protection and Communicable disease Control (HP & CDC) department at the MOPH, accompanied with the team from Animal Health Department, Ministry of Municipality and Environment, have started a field investigation to assess the possible source of the infection and to verify whether any of the patient contacts has suspected symptoms according to the WHO standard case definition. Consequently, all traced contacts will be monitored over a period of 2 weeks, while those who develop suspected symptoms will then be subjected to confirmatory laboratory investigation. The Ministry of Public Health advices citizens and residents, in particular those with comorbidities or low immunity, to abide to cough etiquette and handwashing with soap and water thoroughly and avoid unnecessary contact with sick animals. MOPH proclaimed that Health Protection & CDC Hotlines 66740948 & 66740951 are accessible 24/7 to respond to any notification or enquiry related to infectious diseases. -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail [The above press release mentioned the participation of animal health experts in the investigation of the described case. Information on their observations and findings, including results of laboratory tests (in case animal samples were taken), will be appreciated. Qatar officially notified the OIE about its 1st event of MERS-CoV in camels, as an emerging disease, on 28 Nov 2013. The start of the event was, reportedly, dated 14 Oct 2013. The 'affected population' was kept on a \"small farm with 14 camels, one sheep, one pigeon cage and some chicken\" in Al-Shahanya, Ar Rayyan district. The diagnostic laboratory, given as \"the Erasmus Medical Center (Rotterdam) and National Institute for Public Health and the Environment (Bilthoven), the Netherlands (OIE Reference Laboratory)\", established the diagnosis of MERS-CoV in camels by PCR, on 26 Nov 2013. The report included the following epidemiological comment: \"The health authority in Qatar notified the presence of a confirmed human MERS-CoV case. A joint team from both health and veterinary authorities was sent to the patient farm to investigate the health status of animals and the contact person. A farm worker proved to be positive for MERS-CoV and samples were collected from the 14 existing camels in addition to one sheep, some pigeons and chickens and some environmental samples (water, soil, animal food and grass) and all were sent to the Netherlands for testing. All animals were kept under observation and quarantine and all were apparently healthy\". The above immediate notification was followed by 3 follow-up reports (29 Dec 2013, 22 Apr 2014 and 09 Jun 2014). Follow-up report No 1, submitted a month later, namely on 29 Dec 2013, informed: \"There are no new outbreaks in this report\". The report, however, included the following epidemiological comments: \"The samples from the same herd tested, using the same technique were negative and this may show that MERS-CoV infection in camels is a self-limiting disease. The planned massive survey for MERS-CoV in animals is under implementation and the same herd is under systematic retesting. Follow-up reports will be submitted when there will be new data\". Follow-up report No 2, submitted 22 Apr 2014, addressed \"A single barn of 26 camels of different ages\" in the same location (Al-Shahanyain), Qatar. The diagnostic laboratory was named as \"Department of Viroscience, Erasmus Medical Center, Rotterdam (The Netherlands) (Foreign laboratory)\"; the tests were performed on 19 Apr 2014, applying PCR and virus isolation, both positive. The report included the following epidemiological comments: \"During an existing survey (pilot phase of the survey), nasal swabs were collected from an 8-month-old camel among healthy dromedary camels. The sample was inoculated on Vero cells and cytopathic changes were observed in cells at 48h post-infection. Human hepatoma cells (Huh-7 cells) were inoculated with MERS-CoV to further functionally characterize this viral isolate. After 2 days, virus-induced cytopathic effects were observed in the inoculated cell cultures. Virus production in Huh-7 cells was blocked by pre-incubating MERS-CoV with a 1/200 dilution of serum from MERS-CoV antibody positive camels. Conclusion: these data demonstrate that the MERS-CoV obtained from a dromedary camel is able to replicate in human cells and uses DPP4 as entry receptor, similar as isolates obtained from MERS patients\". Follow-up report No 3, submitted 9 Jun 2014, involved 3 barns with a total number of 12 camels of different ages, similarly in Al-Shahanya. Of the 12 susceptible camels, there were 5 \"cases\", indicated as an apparent morbidity rate of 41.67 percent. The diagnostic laboratory was \"Erasmus Medical Center (Rotterdam) and National Institute for Public Health and the Environment (Bilthoven), The Netherlands (Foreign laboratory)\", which applied SNT. This report included the following epidemiological comment: \"Milk was collected according to local customs; cria's (dromedary calves) were not weaned after delivery but kept at the farm in paddocks adjacent to their dams throughout lactation. Dams were reunited with their cria to trigger milk production. Once milk production was initiated, the milk samples were collected by the camel owner or caretaker without specific hygienic precautions\". The named follow-up report No 3 was the last report of MERS-CoV in camels submitted so far by Qatar to the OIE. It included the statement \"continuing\". No additional MERS-CoV reports from Qatar have become available since June 2014. According to WAHID's archive data, the summary of the event since its start, as of June 2014, was: Total outbreaks = 3 (Submitted) Species/ Susceptible/ Cases/ Deaths/ Destroyed/ Slaughtered Camelidae/ 52/ 9/ 0/ 0/ 0 (see at  ). In May 2017, the OIE updated its case definition for the reporting of MERS-CoV, as follows: \"1. Introduction Dromedary camels have been confirmed by several studies to be the reservoir of the MERS-CoV infection in humans. Zoonotic transmissions of MERS-CoV from dromedary camels to humans were reported in multiple occasions. MERS-CoV has never been reported as a disease in camels though in experimental infections MERS-CoV has been associated with mild upper respiratory signs. Positive PCR results for MERS-CoV or isolation of the virus from camels is notifiable to the OIE because MERS is an emerging disease with a significant public health impact. 2. Confirmed case: A dromedary camel with laboratory confirmation (*note 1) of MERS-CoV infection, with or without clinical signs. 3. Suspected case: a) Observed clinical signs of mild respiratory infection (rhinitis in young dromedaries); and b) Direct epidemiologic link (*note 2) with a confirmed human or camel MERS-CoV case; and c) Testing for MERS-CoV is unavailable, negative or inconclusive (*note 4) on a single inadequate specimen (*note 3). Notes 1 A case may be laboratory confirmed by virus isolation or detection of viral nucleic acid. The presence of viral nucleic acid can be confirmed by 1) a positive RT-PCR result on at least 2 specific genomic targets, 2) a single positive target with sequencing of a 2nd target or 3) a single positive target with positive result in a rapid MERS-CoV Ag Test. Serological investigations are of little value as high percentage of tested dromedaries possess antibodies to MERS-CoV. 2. A direct epidemiological link with a confirmed MERS-CoV dromedary camel may include living or traveling together in close proximity or sharing the same environment with individual dromedaries infected with MERS-CoV. 3. An inadequate specimen would include a specimen that has had improper handling, is judged to be of poor quality by the testing laboratory, or was taken too late in the course of illness. 4. Inconclusive tests may include a positive screening test on a single rRT-PCR target without further confirmation. Animals with an inconclusive initial test should undergo additional sampling and testing to determine if the animal can be classified as a confirmed MERS-CoV case. At herd level, having positive single target PCRs in more than one animal could constitute confirmation. Preference should be a repeat nasopharyngeal specimen. Other types of clinical specimens could also be considered for molecular testing if necessary, including blood/serum, and stool/rectal swab. These generally have lower titers of virus than respiratory tract specimens but have been used to confirm cases when other specimens were inadequate or unobtainable\". As commented by Mod.MPP (see http://promedmail.org/post/20170524.5059234), according to a review of cases reported by Saudi Arabia and classified as \"primary\" cases (N=560), 27.3 percent had a history of camel exposure, and 72.7 percent were reported as still under investigation for high risk exposures at the time of initial confirmation report. The 85th General Session of the World Assembly of OIE Delegates has been held in Paris during this week (21 to 26 May 2017). According to WHO updated information, MERS-CoV has caused, since its initial detection in Sep 2012, at least 1952 human cases, of which at least 693 deaths in 27 countries. It will be interesting to note if the reporting of this disease, according to the OIE criteria, and its possible control in the animal reservoir have been discussed during the General Session. Subscribers are referred to a recent review paper (Ref 1), and in particular to figure 3 \"Hypothesis of MERS-CoV transmission to humans\". A One Health approach to the MERS-CoV issue, its epidemiology and control, will require the active involvement of the 3 relevant international authorities, namely the FAO, OIE and WHO. References M. G. Hemida, A. Elmoslemany, F. Al-Hizab, A. Alnaeem, F. Almathen, B. Faye, D. K. W. Chu, R. A. P. M. Perera & M. Peiris. Dromedary Camels and the Transmission of Middle East. Transboundary & Emerging Diseases 64 (2017) 344-353.  . - Mod.AS A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  .] [", "HANTAVIRUS - AMERICAS (33): ARGENTINA (BUENOS AIRES) **************************************************** A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Fri 26 May 2017 23:19 hs. Source: Bragado Informa (in Spanish, trans. Mod.TY, edited] The Secretary of Public Health Policy, Dr Monica Pusso, together with Dr Gustavo Eachavi, Associate Hospital Director, reported a case of [a] hantavirus [infection]. They reported that after [receiving] a serology report sent to the Pergamino hospital they confirmed the admission of [a] hantavirus [infection case], a 14-year-old hospitalized with pneumonia 14 days ago. Fortunately, the patient progressed favorably from an acute condition, since this aggressive virus [infection] has a high case fatality rate. Dr Pusso explained that this virus is transmitted by a long-tailed mouse that is found in rural areas; inhabiting the countryside among the weeds, and in order to eradicate it, it is important to clean up all possible placs where the mouse is found such as grain storage areas, dark places, \"because hantaviruses are not found in ventilated places with sunshine or cleaned with bleach and it is important not to co-habit with mice and to remove trash because this is sufficient,\" Pusso explained. In order to calm the people, she stated that these are isolated and sporadic cases and in our city there have been 3 cases in approximately 30 years. The municipal Zoonosis Department inspected the patient's home, located in a rural area, and carried out trash removal in the locality as a preventive measure. Dr Echavi stated that, \"this is a disease that begins with a fever, similar to a bad flu, and progresses rapidly to cardiopulmonary insufficiency; this patient was on a respirator for the past few days.\" And he mentioned and congratulated the work of the hospital team that acted rapidly and efficiently. -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts [The reports of hantavirus infections that ProMED receives very seldom mention which hantavirus is the etiologic agent of the case. For a change, the previous report this year [2017] indicated that the hantavirus involved was Buenos Aires hantavirus. In that previous case, of the 3 subtypes of Andes lineage virus, Lechiguanas and Plata were discarded and Buenos Aires was matched by the Molecular Biology Service of the Carlos Malbran Institute. The above case is likely due to infection by this virus. Although the long-tailed mouse was mentioned as the rodent host in the above report, the rodent host of this virus has not been determined. The long-tailed mouse (pygmy rice rat _Oligoryzomys longicaudatus_), is the sigmodontine rodent host of Andes hantavirus that is found in the Andean region of Argentina and Chile, much further west than Buenos Aires province. Maps of Argentina can be seen at  and  . - Mod.TY A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  .] [", "BLUETONGUE - EUROPE (02): (FRANCE) BOVINE, SEROTYPE 8, SPREAD SUSPECTED, ASSESSMENT *********************************************************************************** A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Fri 26 May 2017 Source: Farmers Guardian Insight [edited] Officials raised concern for south-easterly farmers as the disease currently lies only 150km [93.20 mi] from the English south coast. UK chief vet Nigel Gibbens said farmers should consider vaccination and be aware of symptoms, including: mouth ulcers; drooling; swelling of the mouth; head and neck; fever; lameness and breathing problems. He said: \"Our latest assessment shows the risk of outbreak in the UK is currently low, but the detection of the virus in northern France is a timely reminder for farmers to remain vigilant for disease and report any suspicions to the Animal and Plant Health Agency\". \"I would also encourage farmers to talk to their vet to consider if vaccination would benefit their business.\" Risk of bluetongue recirculating in the UK is said to be low but farmers have been warned to be sensible about buying cattle from infected areas. If the disease survives its stint across the English channel from France - which is likely - the south and south-east of England could be looking at at least an 80 percent chance of infection. But as the midge-borne virus often struggles to survive across land, the likelihood it would travel upland to Scotland and north England is fairly low. George Caldow, head of SAC consulting veterinary services, said if bluetongue was to hit the UK, it would likely be stamped out early. He said: \"The situation is as it has been; the risk of incursion in the UK is moderate.\" \"Currently the advice from Scottish government is that livestock keepers should familiarize themselves with the signs of disease, be vigilant when inspecting their stock and avoid purchasing stock that may have passed through or originate from areas of mainland Europe that are currently under restriction.\" Vaccine producer Zoetis urged livestock farmers to vaccinate sheep and cattle ahead of the active midge season, May to October, to protect the free trading of stock. It came as the pharmaceutical's national vet manager Carolyn Hogan warned the risk had 'not gone away' after more than 560 cases already recorded in France since December [2016]. She added: \"France is still picking up cases and as temperatures rise and midge activity increases, the risk of a disease incursion into the UK is likely to rise again.\" \"From the point of an animal being vaccinated to being protected from disease is over 6 weeks.\" \"If bluetongue was to arrive and you were placed under movement restrictions, you need to ask yourself whether you can afford not to move stock for 6 weeks.\" [Byline: Lauren Dean] -- Communicated by: Sabine Zentis Castleview English Longhorns Gut Laach D-52385 Nideggen Germany [For the updated assessment of BTV-8 in France, composed by DEFRA Veterinary & Science Policy Advice Team (International Disease Monitoring), as published on Fri, 26 May 2017, please refer to the reference VITT/1200 BTV-8 in France, available at  . According to the said document, BTV has recently been detected in the Seine Maritime d\u00e9partement (map at ). The closest location there, with positive test results, was within 150 km [93.20 mi] of the UK mainland. According to the ADNS report, the said holding consists of a herd of 261 cattle of which 2 tested positive, although only 60 would have been tested as part of sentinel surveillance. No clinical signs were reported but the national reference laboratory confirmed the animals had also seroconverted, which would indicate the animals were infected earlier in the year, but whether they are still infectious will depend on the level of viraemia, which is not known. The DEFRA team concluded: 1. Only one report has been made in this northern region of France, and there is no reported evidence from French authorities that BTV-8 is circulating in local midge populations or spreading to other animals and therefore it seems that it is not widely circulating in the area of Northern France; 2. The climate and environment in southern England are suitable to support a low level of virus circulation, as seen in the last historical BTV-8 circulation in the UK in 2007; 3. The vector season has most recently started with average daily temperatures well above 12 C [53.6 F] and therefore virus transmission can occur; 4. Records of wind direction and humidity and temperature factors suggest that on only one of the last 10 days would conditions have been suitable for wind assisted spread of Culicoides midges from northern France to England; 5. Testing of animals in South and South East England in 2016 demonstrated a significant proportion of cattle herds had some level of antibody response using a bulk milk test, which could be indicative of vaccination status or previous (historical) infection, dating back several years; 6. DEFRA's disease modeling has shown that even in a warm spring, only a few midge incursions will cause active infections and this will depend on the proportion of no vaccinated animals in England, the level of infection in France, average daily temperatures and vector activity. 7. A census of the animal population demographic in the relevant coastal area of Sussex and Kent suggests this is a relatively low density area, with fewer than 200 cattle herds of which only 14 would be considered large dairy herds (> 200 animals) and around 300 sheep flocks of which 38 have more than 150 sheep and 14 have more than 500 sheep. Cattle tend to be more attractive to the _Culicoides obsoletus complex_ of midges than sheep, and the larger the herd size, the higher the risk of infection being introduced. 8. Although vaccination has not been mandatory in the UK in the past few years, vaccine has been made available to farmers since July 2016. 9. Defra's methods of detecting an incursion include horizon scanning, a passive surveillance system, a post import testing regime and an opportunistic surveillance system which gives us a good level of confidence that disease is not currently circulating in the UK. Conclusions: According to DEFRA's meteorological modeling the current temperatures, humidity and wind direction mean the probability of incursion of BTV via infected midges from France to the UK is low. This single case in northern France does not change the risk level. As mentioned above, it is unclear at present whether the new reported positive tests in north France are due to sentinel animals testing positive for the 1st time. BTV-8 vaccine has been available for the GB market since mid-July 2016, and the decision to vaccinate will be taken by the farmer, which the GB authorities have encouraged all of them to consider, in consultation with their private veterinary surgeon. - Mod.AS A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  .] [", "ANTIBIOTIC RESISTANCE (05): CHINA, COLISTIN, MCR-1, HOSPITAL OUTBREAK ********************************************************************* A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Thu 25 May 2017 Source: Center for Infectious Disease Research and Policy (CIDRAP) [edited] Chinese scientists are reporting a deadly outbreak of MCR-1-producing _Klebsiella pneumoniae_ among pediatric leukemia patients in China, apparently the 1st reported hospital outbreak involving the colistin-resistance gene [1]. In a letter published in The Lancet Infectious Diseases, researchers say clinical isolates--including 1 _Escherichia coli_ and 5 _K. pneumoniae_--from 6 patients with pneumonia admitted to a pediatric leukemia ward in Guangzhou, China, were found to harbor the colistin-resistance gene. The isolates were collected from January 2015 through January 2016. In addition to colistin, which is considered a last-resort antibiotic, the 6 isolates were resistant to several other antibiotics, including polymixin B, cefotaxime, and gentamicin. The 5 _K. pneumoniae_ isolates were additionally resistant to ceftazidime, cefepime, amikacin, fosfomycin, and ciprofloxacin. The patients were treated with combinations of several different antibiotics, including vancomycin, lincomycin, imipenem, and cefotaxime. Two of the patients, who ranged from 2 to 6-years-old, died from their infection. The others recovered. Genetic testing revealed that all 5 of the _K pneumoniae_ isolates were clonally related and belonged to the sequence type ST11, while the _E coli_ isolate belonged to ST156. In all of the isolates, MCR-1 was found to be located on transferable plasmids. These small, floating pieces of DNA can transfer resistance genes to different types of bacteria. The isolates were found to carry a variety of resistance genes. \"In conclusion, we identified a hospital outbreak of an MCR-1-producing _K. pneumoniae_ ST11 strain among children with acute leukaemia,\" the authors write. \"Our finding suggests that MCR-1 can spread in the hospital environment in the absence of colistin use.\" The letter comes from the same research team that initially identified the MCR-1 gene in _E. coli_ samples from pigs, pork products, and humans in China in 2015 [see  ]. The detection of the plasmid-mediated gene, which was thought to be a product of widespread colistin use in Chinese agriculture, raised concern about the potential for the emergence of multidrug-resistant \"superbugs\" that are essentially untreatable with current antibiotics. China banned use of the drug in animal feed in 2016, based in part on the findings of that study. In January of this year [2017], the team reported in The Lancet Infectious Diseases that MCR-1 had been detected in _E. coli_ and _K. pneumoniae_ isolates collected at 2 hospitals in China's Zhejiang and Guangdong provinces from 2007 through 2015 [2]. Although the prevalence of the gene was low, the findings documented the spread of MCR-1 to the clinical setting in China. Chinese hospitals did not use colistin in patients until this year [2017]. Timothy Walsh, DSc, lead author of that study and a professor at Cardiff University in Wales, said at the time that he was concerned that clinical use of colistin in China would lead to more colistin-resistant infections in humans. \"The spread of colistin-resistant bacteria will likely worsen when the drug is introduced in humans,\" he said in a press release. (Walsh is a co-author on the current study.) Since MCR-1 was 1st identified, it has been detected in isolates from animals, food products, and humans in more than 30 countries, including the United States. Although the US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention did not comment on whether this is the 1st reported MCR-1 hospital outbreak, the agency said in an e-mail, \"The mcr-1 gene vividly illustrates the many domestic and global challenges facing us as we work to contain the spread of antibiotic resistance and improve antibiotic use.\" [Byline: Chris Dall] [1. Guo-Bao Tian, Yohei Doi, Jianzhong Shen, Timothy R Walsh, Yang Wang, Rong Zhang, Xi Huang. Correspondence: MCR-1-producing _Klebsiella pneumoniae_ outbreak in China. The Lancet Infectious Diseases 17(6):577. Published: June 2017. DOI:  . Available at:  . 2. Wang, Y, Tian, G-B, Zhang, R et al. Prevalence, risk factors, outcomes, and molecular epidemiology of mcr-1-positive Enterobacteriaceae in patients and healthy adults from China: an epidemiological and clinical study. Lancet Infect Dis. 2017; 17: 390-399.] -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts [The following is the text of the 1st article referenced in the news report above: \"In January, 2017, The Lancet Infectious Diseases published our finding that Enterobacteriaceae carrying mcr-1, a plasmid-mediated colistin resistance gene, is highly heterogenous in sequence type (ST) grouping and plasmid types indicating the diversity of mcr-1-carrying bacteria in China, and mcr-1-positive Enterobacteriaceae infections were associated with male sex, immunosuppression and antibiotics use before hospitalization. Here we report a hospital outbreak of the MCR-1-producing _Klebsiella pneumoniae_. \"A total of 6 clinical isolates including 1 _Escherichia coli_ and 5 _K. pneumoniae_ were identified from 6 patients with pneumonia admitted to a paediatric leukaemia ward at a hospital in Guangzhou, China, during 2 months between December, 2015, and January, 2016. These patients were treated with different combinations of vancomycin, imipenem, lincomycin, cefotaxime, and caspofungin acetate. Two of the 6 patients died from their infections. \"All 6 isolates were resistant to colistin, polymyxin B, cefotaxime, and gentamicin; and the 5 _K. pneumoniae_ isolates were additionally resistant to ceftazidime, cefepime, amikacin, fosfomycin, and ciprofloxacin. Various resistance genes were identified by PCR and sequencing in these isolates, including mcr-1, blaTEM-1, bla(CTX-M-3), aac(3)-IIa, aph(3')-Ia, fosA3 in _E. coli_ and mcr-1, blaTEM-1, blaSHV-11, blaCTX-M-3, aac(3)-IVa, aphA6, armA, fosA3, qnrB4, and qnrS1 in _K. pneumoniae_ (appendix).2 \"All 6 isolates were subjected to multilocus sequence typing (MLST) and pulsed field gel electrophoresis (PFGE).1 As a result, 5 mcr-1-positive _K. pneumonia_ isolates were identified as ST11, and the mcr-1-positive _E. coli_ from patient one belonged to ST156. Results of PFGE were consistent with MLST and indicated that the 5 _K. pneumoniae_ were clonally related. Colistin resistance was successfully transferred to _E. coli_ C600 with high conjugation frequencies (10^-1 to 10^-2) in all isolates, suggesting that mcr-1 was located on transferable plasmids. The results of S1-PFGE and plasmid replicon typing for mcr-1-carrying plasmid in the transconjugants showed that mcr-1 was located at IncX4 plasmids of approximately 50 kb in size in all 6 isolates, which harboured blaTEM-1 and blaCTX-M-3 (appendix). \"In conclusion, we identified a hospital outbreak of an MCR-1-producing _K. pneumoniae_ ST11 strain among children with acute leukaemia. Our finding suggests that mcr-1 can spread in the hospital environment in the absence of colistin use.\" Plasmid-encoded mcr-1 has been detected worldwide in _E. coli_, K. pneumoniae_ and other Enterobacteriaceae, at times co-localized with other resistance genes such as ESBL genes and carbapenemase genes on plasmids. Co-localization of mobile genetic elements could lead to horizontal transfer of multidrug resistance to other nosocomial pathogens and increase the difficulty of antibiotic treatment. When colistin resistance is genetically linked to resistance to other antibiotics on mobile genetic elements, colistin resistance could be co-selected by other antibiotics and spread in a hospital environment, even in the absence of colistin use, as was the case in the hospital outbreak in China described in the above news report. - Mod.ML A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  .] [", "CANINE DISTEMPER - USA: (SOUTH CAROLINA) **************************************** A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Thu 25 May 2017 Source: WIS TV 1:20 pm EDT [edited] [Canine distemper] is a [viral disease] looking just like rabies, and it's just as lethal for your dog. It doesn't have a cure, and there's an outbreak of it in Kershaw County. \"It's airborne,\" veterinarian Dr Wendy King said. \"It can go from one cage to the next and they don't even have to touch each other. So what happens is if any of these pets in quarantine are in the same area, they can spread the disease.\" King, who works at Elgin's Spears Creek Veterinary Clinic, says the virus hasn't been prevalent in almost 20-30 years since the vaccine became readily available. Distemper presents first with a green discharge from the dog's nose, then a fever and lethargic behavior. Then, the virus invades the nervous system as the animal begins to exhibit neurological signs like staggering, trembling, and seizures. These signs look just like rabies. The difference between rabies and distemper is that distemper cannot be contracted by humans, while humans can get rabies. \"If the dog gets distemper, 80 to 90 percent of them are fatal cases,\" King said. \"There is no treatment for it, and if they survive it, they have permanent neurological damage. The problem is, there's always going to be a little bit in the wild. Because distemper is in canines -- or 'canids' it can be foxes, coyotes, and even raccoons can get it. So it's always going to be out there.\" According to DHEC [Department of Health and Environmental Control], every year about 124 animals test positive for rabies in South Carolina. It's not possible to tell whether a dog has contracted rabies or distemper until after the dog has died and tests are done. The distemper outbreak has been seen in Lancaster County as well. The Lancaster County Animal Shelter closed temporarily in early May [2017] as a result of a distemper outbreak at the shelter. Puppies get a set of 4 distemper vaccines starting at 6 weeks old. They get their next distemper vaccines at 9, 12, and 15 weeks. The rabies vaccine begins at 15 weeks. King said preventing distemper in your pets is simple: make sure your dogs get their annual vaccinations. \"I want people to be aware that these are out there, and both of these diseases are preventable,\" King said. [Byline: Samantha Bleiweis] -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail [The state of South Carolina can be located on the HealthMap/ProMED-mail interactive map at  . A county map can be seen at  . - Sr.Tech.Ed.MJ This article indicates this virus looks like rabies. This is true especially in wildlife, but even then, depending upon the species, there are likely subtle clues of distemper vs rabies. Canine distemper impacts wildlife populations and contact between wild animals and domestic dogs can facilitate the spread of the virus. Canine distemper outbreaks in local raccoon populations can signal increased risk for pet dogs in the area. Initially, infected dogs will develop watery to pus-like discharge from their eyes. They then develop fever, nasal discharge, coughing, lethargy, reduced appetite, and vomiting. As the virus attacks the nervous system, infected dogs develop circling behavior, head tilt, muscle twitches, convulsions with jaw chewing movements and salivation (\"chewing gum fits\"), seizures, and partial or complete paralysis. The virus may also cause the footpads to thicken and harden, leading to its nickname \"hard pad disease.\" Animals affected with this disease usually die or have severe neurological difficulties if they survive. The \"chewing gum fits\" is one clinical sign veterinarians recognize to attempt to distinguish this from rabies. There are clinical tests to aid in the diagnosis, in addition to the clinical observation. Of course, when the animal is deceased, or euthanized, the brain can be sent for rabies testing. While puppies may receive a series of 4 shots, it is equally important to get an annual booster for your adult pets. If this virus is circulating in your area, avoiding dog parks and other canine social events should reduce the risk of contacting a pet incubating the virus. The warning of this article is to be sure your pet is current on rabies and distemper vaccines. - Mod.TG] [", "CANINE INFLUENZA - USA (02): (FLORIDA) ************************************** A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Fri 26 May 2017 4:51 PM Source: WFTV [edited] Veterinarians across Central Florida are warning dog owners to get their pets vaccinated because of a spike in influenza. The dog flu spreads quickly and veterinarians told Channel 9's Jeff Deal that if owners go to someplace like a dog kennel or dog park, they recommend the vaccine. [AJ] takes her 8-month-old dog, to the dog park every day. \"She's got a whole crew she likes to hang with,\" AJ said. She said the dogs share everything, but she hopes the flu isn't one of them. \"I'd never heard of the doggie flu. I'm a medical student. I'm pretty familiar with the human flu, but not the dog flu,\" she said. Underhill Animal Hospital recommends most dog owners vaccinate against it. \"If they board here, we require the influenza vaccine,\" said Dr Jill Rymut-Andrade, with Underhill Animal Hospital. Rymut-Andrade said the canine flu first became a problem in northern states, but it's starting to show up in Florida. Dogs can be sick up to 4 days before signs like fever, sniffing and coughing. Rymut-Andrade said even cats are getting the virus. The vet said if the flu is left untreated, fewer than 10 percent of dogs will die from it. The flu makes them very miserable, just like when people get the flu. [Byline: Jeff Deal] -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts [The state of Florida can be located on the HealthMap/ProMED-mail interactive map at . A county map can be seen at . - Sr.Tech.Ed.MJ This can be a serious disease that spreads easily between dogs. Owners should be extremely cautious of taking dogs to dog parks and other canine social events, when boarding, or even going to the groomers. Also as the outbreak seems to be just beginning, there is no information on which of the 2 types of canine influenza (CI) this is. \"CI, or dog flu, is a highly contagious respiratory infection of dogs that is caused by an influenza A virus. In the US, CI has been caused by 2 influenza strains. The 1st strain reported in the United States, beginning in 2004, was an H3N8 influenza A virus. This strain is closely related to the virus that causes equine influenza, and it is thought that the equine influenza virus mutated to produce the canine strain. In 2015, an outbreak that started in Chicago was caused by a separate CI virus, H3N2. The strain causing the 2015 outbreak was almost genetically identical to an H3N2 strain previously reported only in Asia -- specifically, Korea, China, and Thailand. In Asia, this H3N2 strain is believed to have resulted from the direct transfer of an avian influenza virus -- possibly from among viruses circulating in live bird markets -- to dogs. Since March 2015, thousands of dogs have been confirmed positive for H3N2 CI across the US.\" ( ) More information regarding canine influenza or dog flu can be found in the moderator's comments in ProMED-mail post http://promedmail.org/post/20170210.4829179. - Mod.TG] [", "TILAPIA SYNCYTIAL VIRUS - WORLDWIDE: FAO, ALERT *********************************************** A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Sun 28 May 2917 Source: Xinhua via Tempo [edited] A highly contagious disease is spreading among farmed and wild tilapia, one of the world's most important fish for human consumption, the UN Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO) said on [Fri 26 May 2017]. The Rome-based UN agency said the outbreak should be treated with concern, and countries importing tilapias should take appropriate risk-management measures, including intensifying diagnostics testing, enforcing health certificates, deploying quarantine measures and developing contingency plans. According to a Special Alert released by FAO's Global Information and Early Warnings System (GIEWS), Tilapia Lake Virus (TiLV) has now been confirmed in 5 countries on 3 continents: Colombia, Ecuador, Egypt, Israel and Thailand. While the pathogen poses no public health concern, it can decimate infected tilapia population. In 2015, world tilapia production, from both aquaculture and capture, amounted to 6.4 million tons, with an estimated value of USD 9.8 billion, and worldwide trade was valued at USD 1.8 billion. The fish is a mainstay of global food security and nutrition, GIEWS said. The FAO also said tilapia producing countries need to be vigilant, and should follow aquatic animal-health code protocols of the World Organization for Animal Health (OIE) when trading tilapia. They should initiate an active surveillance program to determine the presence or absence of TiLV, the geographic extent of the infection and identify risk factors that may help contain it. According to the food agency, actively TiLV surveillance is being conducted in China, India, Indonesia and it is planned to start in the Philippines. In Israel, an epidemiological retrospective survey is expected to determine factors influencing low survival rates and overall mortalities, including the relative importance of TiLV. In addition, a private company is currently working on the development of live attenuated vaccine for TiLV. -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail [Official notification of this new, emerging disease has been submitted by Israel on 21 May 2017 (see http://promedmail.org/post/20170524.5059646). Similar notifications are expected from the other affected countries. The identification of an emerging infectious disease with international trade impact deserves considering its inclusion in OIE's list of notifiable fish diseases. - Mod.AS] [", "DENGUE/DHF UPDATE (05): ASIA, PACIFIC, AFRICA, DIAGNOSIS, VACCINE, RESEARCH *************************************************************************** A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases In this update: [1]Cases in various countries Asia --- In this update: Asia Regional Update Sri Lanka - National - National - National - National Nepal India - Karanataka (Mysuru) - Andhra Pradesh - Kerala (Kannur) - Kerala (Thiruvananthapuram) - Kerala (Palakkad) - Kerala (Kochi) - Kerala (Paripally) - Delhi - Delhi - Delhi Bangladesh - Dhaka Pakistan - Sindh (Karachi) China - Hong Kong Taiwan Myanmar - Rakhine State - Yangon - Rakhine State Vietnam - National - Hanoi - Hanoi Philippines - National - Regional - Surigao Province - Davao City - Negros Occidental Malaysia - National - Kedah Thailand Cambodia La R\u00e9union Island Pacific --- - Vanuatu - Fiji - Fiji - New Caledonia - New Caledonia - Niue Africa --- Kenya - National - Kisumu County [2] Diagnosis [3] Vaccine [4] Research ****** Asia --- Sri Lanka - National. 1 Apr 2017. Sri Lanka deaths rise to 53 in past 90 days, 26 000 cases So far reported this year [2017], with nearly more than 50 percent from Western Province; Into 2 and a half months of the year, the number of dengue cases is reported to be 21 000, the highest ever the country has experienced for similar periods in other years, while the death toll is also rising steadily, more than what has been seen in the last 3 years. - National. 17 Apr 2017. Dengue in Sri Lanka: More than double the cases from 2016. Sri Lanka is in the grip of a severe epidemic of Dengue fever and Dengue hemorrhagic fever. The epidemic did not happen over a short period. Dengue has been in Sri Lanka since 1962. However, it was not a major public health problem. The disease was progressing at a very slow rate. Since about 2004, the numbers of cases have started going up and dramatically since about 2008. During the first 3 months of 2017, Sri Lankan health officials reported 30 486 dengue fever cases. This compares to 13 849 during the same period in 2016. That is a 2.2 times increase year to year. More than 6900 cases were reported in the Colombo area alone. In all of 2016, 55 150 dengue fever cases were reported and only 29 777 in 2015. Concerning prevention of dengue, while a number of countries have approved the use of the vaccine, Dengvaxia, the Sri Lanka Ministry of Health is carrying out investigations on the vaccine to determine if it is suitable to use in the country. - National. 16 May 2017. Sri Lanka cases rise to 44 623 with 115 deaths so far this year [2017] - alarming increase of patients compared to previous years. - National. 24 May 2017. About 50 000 patients have been reported to be infected with Dengue in 2017 so far, and added that small children were also among the victims. The health sector has urged the citizens to take necessary steps to prevent the spread of Dengue. Nepal (Dhading, Province 3) Date: 28 May 2017 From: Anup Bastola [edited] A 25 years old male from Kalleri-2 Dading (Province 3) was admitted with fever, arthalgia, myalgia and retro-orbital pain on [26 May 2017] in Sukraraj Tropical and Infectious Disease Hospital (Province 3). His laboratory tests revealed thrmbocytopenia with normal white blood cells counts. Serology for dengue NS1 was positive. Serological tests for leptospira and brucella were negative with no growth in blood culture. He has a past history of having traveled to Bhaisepati, Kathmandu (province 3) on and off. Dengue is not common in Dhading (province 3) and detection of dengue in this raining season is quite unusual. Vector control is one of the major steps in prevention of a dengue outbreak. Responsible organization should carry out the field investigation and search and destroy method to prevent people from getting sick from dengue. -- Anup Bastola, MD, MCTM Consultant Tropical Medicine Physician Sukraraj Tropical and Infectious Disease Hospital Teku, Kathmandu Nepal [Promed Mail thanks Dr Bastola for his update from Nepal. - Mod.UBA] India - Karnataka (Mysuru). 25 May 2017. Pre-monsoon showers bring back dengue worry in Mysuru. Over 102 positive cases reported in the district so far this month - Andhra Pradesh. 18 May 2017. About 32 dengue positive cases reported in Visakhapatnam district this year [2017]. According to the officials of District Medical and Health department, from 1 Jan to 15 May [2017], as many as 466 people had symptoms of dengue and their test samples were sent for examination. A total of 32 of the 466 people tested dengue positive; 9 cases were registered from the urban areas, 14 from peri-urban limits, 6 cases were reported from rural limits and 3 from Visakhapatnam agency. Fishing Harbour, steel plant, port, One Town and a few other areas are the dengue hubs, say officials. The city recorded most of the dengue cases last year [2016], with 1127 persons testing dengue positive and 1 person succumbing to it. - Kerala (Kannur).18 Apr 2017. As many as 48 cases reported from Mattannur municipality. Preventive measures, including spraying of insecticides to kill mosquitoes and fogging, were already taken up by the Health Services personnel and the health wing of the Mattannur municipality, Dr. Nayak told The Hindu, health personnel and local officials in the municipality have also launched awareness campaign on the need to prevent mosquito bites and eradicate mosquitoes. - Kerala (Thiruvananthapuram). 29 Apr 2017. It has recorded 70 percent of the dengue case load of the State annually. This year [2017] too, out of the 2203 cases reported in the State so far (till 28 Apr 2017), Thiruvananthapuram has chalked up 1486 cases. Public health experts also point out that the urban environment and climatic conditions in Thiruvananthapuram cannot be any different from that in other districts like Ernakulam or Kozhikode. In fact, one would expect that the case load from plantation districts would be more because mosquito control in the wild is a tough proposition. \"The high case load in the district is because of the robust fever surveillance and reporting systems and the excellent diagnostic facilities in place here. It is nothing but gross under-reporting that shows the other districts as showing a lesser case load,\" a senior official says... - Kerala (Palakkad). 11 May 2017. Despite preventive measures, dengue cases are on the rise in the district with at least 19 people testing positive for the mosquito-borne disease since 1 May 2017. Hundred cases were reported in Apr [2017]. According to medical officers, dengue cases are normally not reported during the hot summer months of April and May. However, mosquitoes in large numbers are breeding in water-stored at households. Now the Health Department is focusing more on eliminating breeding sources. Efforts are on to remove all stagnant water sources apart from intensifying fogging and spraying. Campaigns are on to ensure public support for the mosquito-eradication drive. If not properly checked, the situation is likely to turn worse with the onset of monsoon... - Kerala (Kochi). 13 May 2017. A total of 25 cases of dengue fever have been reported from Kochi district over the past 12 days. So far, 72 dengue cases have been reported this year [2017]. - Kerala (Paripally). 19 May 2017. 6 police officers infected and an average of 200 people reported of affected with dengue reporting to Kollam Med College daily. - Delhi. 26 Apr 2017. Delhi has as many as 80 cases of chikungunya and 30 of dengue, as per municipal corporation reports, since January this year [2017]. Nine of the chikungunya cases were reported this month, untill 22 April 2017. Almost no cases of both the mosquito-borne diseases were reported during the same period in the previous years. April is typically not the season for mosquito-borne illnesses. The population of aedes aegypti mosquito, which spreads dengue and chikungunya, explodes usually after rains... - Delhi. 1 May 2017. Six cases of dengue were reported in January [2017], 4 in February [2017], 11 in March [2017], and 11 in April [2017],. Lt Governor Anil Baijal on 29 Apr 2017 had directed Delhi government-run LNJP Hospital to keep beds ready for dengue and chikungunya patients in the event of an outbreak of the vector-borne diseases in the city. Until 14 Jan 2017, only 2 chikungunya cases were reported, while no dengue case had been reported till then. Chikungunya and dengue cases in the national capital had tapered off by December first week last year [2016] ending the vector-borne disease season in the city that witnessed its worst chikungunya outbreak in the last 10 years, but cases are still being registered, prompting authorities to go for early preparedness. - Delhi. 15 May 2017. Nearly 90 cases of chikungunya in Delhi, 36 of dengue. Bangladesh - Dhaka. 22 Apr 2017. The capital is yet again experiencing an early outbreak of dengue and untimely rains may be to blame. Like last year [2016], _Aedes_ mosquitoes, transmitter of the dengue virus, have bred early this year [2017] alarming authorities and city dwellers and health officials say there are chances their number would be larger. This year [2017], there have been frequent rains during January and April before the start of monsoon. This outbreak comes after a record number of dengue cases last year [2016] and an outbreak of chikungunya last winter. Chikungunya is spread by the same mosquito. At least 126 people were infected with dengue between 1 Jan and 19 Apr 2017, a number highest since 2000 for the same period, shows data from the health directorate. In Bangladesh, most of the dengue cases are reported during June and October as intermittent rains and high temperature and humidity during the months create the ideal breeding conditions for Aedes. However, the authorities last year [2016] saw a new trend of early dengue infection. During January and April 2016, at least 71 dengue cases were reported in the capital. At least 14 of them died. The total number of dengue cases that year was 6020, the highest since 2002. Pakistan - Sindh (Karachi). 24 Apr 2017. Eleven more dengue fever cases are reported in Karachi city, taking the patients toll to 195 in the city since 1 Jan 2017. According to weekly report issued by Prevention and Control Program for Dengue in Sindh, as many as 11 new dengue fever cases surfaced in Karachi from 16 to 22 Apr 2017, while a total of 206 such cases were reported in Sindh province so far, out of which 195 in Karachi, 4 in Hyderabad, 5 in Tharparkar or Mithi and 2 in Umer Kot. In Karachi, out of the 11 dengue fever cases, 1 was reported from District Central, 5 from District South, 4 from District East and 1 from District Malir, respectively. China - Hong Kong. 19 May 2017. From May 12 to 18, the CHP recorded 3 confirmed imported cases in Hong Kong; patients had returned from Thailand (2) and Singapore (1). As of yesterday [18 May2017], the 29 imported DF cases so far in 2017 were mainly imported from Thailand (8), the Philippines (5), Indonesia and Sri Lanka (4 each). No local cases have been recorded so far this year [2017]. Dengue remains endemic in some neighbouring and overseas areas. In Guangdong, 27 cases were recorded in 2017 as of 12 May [2017]. In Asia, 1 local case has been filed to date in Taiwan in 2017, 10343 cases in Thailand, 1016 in Singapore and 63 in Japan since 2 Jan 2017. Taiwan 16 May 2017. Taiwan records year's first indigenous dengue fever case - a resident of Kaohsiung. Since the start of this year [2017], Taiwan has recorded 79 imported cases of dengue fever, mostly from Malaysia, Indonesia and Vietnam, according to CDC data. A total of 380 indigenous cases and 363 imported cases of the mosquito-borne disease were reported last year [2017], according to the CDC. Myanmar - Rakhine State. 5 May 2017. Dengue fever has spread in Belya Village in Pauktaw Township in Rakhine State, said Dr Thaung Hlaing, Health Officer of the Public Health Department in Rakhine State. A medical team from the health department is now providing treatment at the dengue fever outbreak area and carrying out preventative measures to control the mosquito-borne disease. A total of 35 people out of 64 patients were classified as suspected dengue fever cases, while 12 have been confirmed as infected with dengue fever. More cases are expected to be confirmed. - Yangon. 16 May 2017. The outbreak of dengue fever in Myanmar's Yangon has increased by 4 times in the 1st 4 months of this year [2017] compared to the same period of last year [2016], the official Global New Light of Myanmar reported [Tue 16 May 2017]. During the period, a total of 954 dengue fever cases occurred (mostly in Hlinethaya and Dala townships), causing 4 deaths in Yangon region while only 214 cases were reported in the same period of last year [2016], according to the Yangon Health Department. - Rakhine State. 22 May 2017. Apart from Maungdaw Township, more than 220 people have been infected with dengue fever (DHF) and 2 were reported dead in all townships in Rakhine State. Health officials worry that the number of DHF cases may become higher than that in the previous year [2016]. The DHF infection is common in the rainy season. But this year [2017], the DHF cases there have been reported early. Last year [2016], 5 out of 556 people infected with DHF died. Rakhine State Public Health Department has urged locals to cooperate in sanitation tasks in order to eliminate mosquito breeding grounds before the monsoon. Vietnam - National. 5 May 2017. According to the Ministry of Health, 20 947 dengue cases have been reported nationwide, with 8 deaths, so far, this year [2017]. The number of dengue cases has shown a trend of increasing nationwide since early April [2017], according to the ministry, with 6900 cases (including 2 deaths) reported in April [2017] alone against 4000 cases in the 1st 3 months of this year [2017]. In Hanoi, the Preventive Health Centre said there were 500 cases in the last 4 months, an increase of 45 percent against the same period last year [2016]. Dengue fever was prevalent in all areas of the city. According to health experts, unseasonable rains have created favourable conditions for the breeding of mosquitoes and the spread of the disease. The peak season for dengue generally falls from May to November. In 2016, the prevalence of dengue fever per 100 000 people in Vietnam was 109.5, lower than other regional countries such as Malaysia, which had a prevalence of 325.3. - Hanoi. 6 May 2017. As of April 2017, Hanoi has recorded 563 dengue fever cases in 173 communes, wards and towns of 26 districts, an increase of 45 percent against the same period last year [2016], according to the Preventive Health Centre. Environmental sanitation campaign to launch. - Hanoi. 22 May 2017. The number of dengue fever cases in Ha Noi has increased since the beginning of this year [2017], even though it is not yet high season for the disease. Statistics released by the Ha Noi Department of Health showed that since the beginning of the year [2017], the capital has recorded 699 cases of dengue fever, double the amount of the same period last year [2016]. Most patients came from Dong Da, Hoang Mai, Hai Ba Trung and Thanh Xuan districts. Philippines - National. 26 Apr 2017. After reporting more than 200 000 dengue fever cases the past 2 years, and more than 1000 dengue related fatalities in 2016 in the Philippines, early 2017 data shows that the dengue case tally is down so far. The Philippines Department of Health, National Epidemiology Centre has reported 26 433 suspected cases of dengue since the beginning of the year [2017]. This compares with 41 170 cases for the same period in 2016, a decrease of 35.8 percent. In the past 50 years, the incidence of dengue worldwide has increased 30-fold, largely as a consequence of the growth of cities and increased travel. The World Health Organization (WHO) estimates there may be 50-100 million dengue infections worldwide every year. However, new research from the University of Oxford and the Wellcome Trust, using cartographic approaches, estimate there to be 390 million dengue infections per year worldwide. - Regional. 6 Apr 2017. There were more dengue deaths in Central Visayas in the 1st 3months of this year [2017] compared to the same period last year [2016], according to the Regional Epidemiology Surveillance Unit (RESU) of the Department of Health (DOH).In the latest data released by RESU, 48 people had died from dengue from 1 Jan to 1 Apr 2017, up from 30 deaths during the 1st quarter of 2016. Four of the dengue deaths occurred in the latter part of March [2017]. The number of dengue cases, however, dropped slightly, from 4531 last year [2016] to 4517 this year [2017]. Cebu City had the bulk of the dengue cases in the region, with 20.8 percent of the total. There were 17 dengue deaths and 921 cases in the city in the 1st 3 months of this year [2017], RESU said. Mandaue City reported 408 dengue cases, with 1 fatality. Lapu-Lapu City had 325 dengue cases with no reported death. The municipality of Consolacion had 212 cases, with 4 fatalities, while Dumaguete City reported 212 cases with no deaths. The DOH continues to urge the public to clean up their surroundings and destroy mosquito breeding grounds to avoid becoming victim to dengue disease. - Surigao Province (Surigao city). 1 Apr 2017. Health officials yesterday [31 Mar 2017] urged Surigaonons to continue taking preventive measures against the dreaded dengue virus after 1 death and 31 new cases of infection were recorded in a 2-month period this year [2017]. The case breakdown is as follows: Cavite, 280; Laguna, 230; Batangas, 182; Rizal, 95 and Quezon, 58. The Provincial Epidemiology Surveillance Unit (PESU) confirmed that cases of dengue fever in Cavite's cities and municipalities are on the upward trend. - Davao City. 5 May 2017. Davao City records 15 dengue deaths since January to 4 May 2017. The number of cases is lower compared to same period last year [2016] with more or less 2000 cases from January to May, but the number of cases is alarming. \"Based on our investigation on the number of deaths, it is health seeking behavior of the immediate family of the victim.\" - Negros Occidental. 25 May 2017. Bacolod City , 305 cases with 5 deaths. Increase of 96.2 percent against same period last year. Handumanan has the highest number of dengue cases with 33, followed by Mansilingan - 25, Manadalagan - 23, Granada - 22, Alijis - 21, Estefania- 20, Villamonte - 19,Sumag - 18,Tangub - 17, and Vista Alegre - 17. Malaysia - National. 1 May 2017. From the beginning of the year [2017] through April 2017, Malaysian health authorities have reported 31 528 dengue fever cases, including 69 fatalities. Selangor is the state with the most cases with 16 710, followed by Perak (2794), Kuala Lumpur (2741), and Johor (2267). In 2016, Malaysia reported just over 100 000 dengue cases. - Kedah. 10 May 2017. A total of 513 cases of dengue fever were recorded in Kedah since January until 6 May 2017, an increase of 67.1 percent or 206 cases compared with the corresponding period last year [2016]. State Health director Datuk Dr Norhizan Ismail said 3 deaths due to dengue were also recorded during the period this year [2017], involving 1 case in Kulim and 2 cases in Kuala Muda. Thailand - National. 28 May 2017. More than 136,000 cases of dengue fever, the world's fastest spreading tropical disease, have been confirmed so far this year [2017], with the highest concentration of cases in and around the capital Bangkok and in the northern province of Chiang Mai. - 126 fatalities so far this year [2017], health experts said on Thu 25 May 2017, pointing to climate change as a factor behind the spike in cases. Contributed by: John Cathey Cambodia - National. 28 Apr 2017. Cambodia reported 510 dengue fever cases in the first 15 weeks of 2017, down 62 percent from the 1366 cases over the same period last year [2016], according to an official report on Fri 26 May 2017. \"The incidence rate was 3.1 cases out of 100 000 people,\" said the report posted to the website of National Center for Parasitology, Entomology and Malaria Control. It added that no fatality was reported during the first 15 weeks of this year [2017], while 3 were reportedly killed by the virus over the same period last year [2016]. Huy Rekol, director of the National Center for Parasitology, Entomology and Malaria Control, said that more than 71 percent of the patients were children aged between 5 and 14 years old. In Cambodia, the outbreak of the virus usually begins in the rainy season from May to October. - La R\u00e9union Island, Indian Ocean. 2 May 2017. 15 cases were reported including 6 in Saint-Paul Dengue is in circulation on the island. The district of Bois Rouge in Saint-Paul is considered an active center of  circulation of the virus: 5 patients have been identified in this sector. The other situations are on the side of Saint-Leu, Saint-Louis and Sainte-Marie. Since the beginning of the year [2017], 10 indigenous dengue cases have been identified confirming the establishment of a circulation of the virus on the territory. In order to limit the spread of the virus, the services of the Indian Ocean Health Agency (ARS OI) have put in place reinforced surveillance and vector control measures. In this season, weather conditions are still favorable to the development of mosquitoes, the Agency reminds the population of the necessary preventive measures. Epidemiological situation ------------------------- Since the beginning of the year 2017, 15 cases of dengue have been reported in Reunion: 5 imported cases (returning from travel) and 10 indigenous cases (contracted in Reunion). The surveys carried out by the ARS OI identified 4distinct contamination situations, 3 of which could be related to an imported travel case. The 1st 3 situations identified in the communes of Saint-Leu, Saint-Louis and Sainte-Marie concerned only a few sporadic cases and seem to be at this stage contained. The 4th situation, located in the Bois Rouge district of Saint-Paul, is now considered an active focus of virus circulation with 6 identified cases. The number of cases of dengue remains limited for the moment and the circulation of the virus seems moderate. It may, however, intensify at a time when meteorological conditions are still favorable to the development of mosquito vectors. In addition, ARS OI has decided to activate level 2A of the ORSEC dengue control device: \"Identification of an indigenous moderate viral circulation - appearance of one or more clusters of cases or sporadic cases.\" [In French trans. Corr.SB] Pacific --- - Vanuatu. 13 Apr 2017. Report from International Federation of Red Cross And Red Crescent Societies Summary of major revisions made to emergency plan of action. This update details progress of the operation from start, 26 Jan 2017 to 4 April 2017, and extends the operation by approximately 6 weeks (from 26 April 2017 until 31 May 2017) to allow monitoring and evaluation (M&E) and lessons learnt activities to be finalized without haste, also considering that the Cat 2 Tropical Cyclone Cook passed over Vanuatu on 9 Apr 2017, even if impacts are considered minor. As expected however, the Vanuatu Red Cross Society (VRCS) staff and volunteers have been involved in assessments and an elevated risk of increased incidence of vector borne disease due to the amount of rainfall and flooding exists in some areas... - Fiji. 27 Apr 2017. Fiji has recorded 913 laboratory confirmed positive cases of dengue fever from 1 Jan to 2 Apr 2017 with the bulk of the cases coming from the Central Division. According to the Health and Medical Services Ministry, there was an average of 6 hospital admissions weekly with an average length of stay of 4 days being reported from the Colonial War Memorial Hospital in Suva. The ministry also recorded 1 dengue fever-related death at the CWM Hospital Intensive Care Unit this month. The dengue fever cases were high between the age group of 10 to 29 years with more males contracting the fever, the ministry said. The ministry's overview of dengue fever cases noted that the trend from 1 Jan to 4 Apr 2017 implied a continued increase in the incidence rate despite the best efforts to control the situation. The ministry said interventions such as subdivisional clean-up programs, perifocal spraying and awareness activities were carried out. - Fiji. 16 May 2017. CDC issues travel notice for the archipelago of Fiji after 913 cases of Dengue confirmed with 1 fatality. Most cases on main Island of Viti Levu. - New Caledonia. 4 Apr 2017. There are signs that a dengue outbreak in New Caledonia is stabilizing as authorities work to bring it under control. They declared a dengue epidemic in January [2017] and 6 people have died of the disease since then. While there were more than 2000 cumulative cases of dengue in New Caledonia, Health and Social Affairs Directorate doctor Jean-Paul Grangeon said there were signs the outbreak was under control. - New Caledonia. 18 Apr 2017. Dengue fever kills seven in New Caledonia. Some 2400 dengue cases have already been reported and the peak has not been reached. A 57-year-old woman died after contracting dengue fever in New Caledonia. She is the 7th victim of the disease since the epidemic began in January [2017], the government said on Tue 18 Apr 2017.The patient was hospitalized on 12 Apr 2017 and died 3 days later after \"complications of dengue\" and \"previous pathologies\" which have weakened her, said the executive. Since the beginning of January [2017], 7 people, several of whom had no medical history, succumbed to this viral disease, transmitted by the mosquito _Aedes Aegypti_. A week after cyclone Cook, the authorities renew their call to vigilance and the fight against the breeding sites, which multiplied due to the torrential rains. The current epidemic has so far caused 2400 reported cases of dengue, according to the New Caledonia Department of Health and Social Affairs. [In French trans. Corr.SB] - Niue. 17 May 2017.Niue's health authorities have issued a warning about dengue fever and confirmed 1 case on the island. The authorities say as dengue fever is a notifiable disease it's an offence not to report cases to the authorities. They have started spraying villages around the island to prevent dengue spreading. Africa --- Kenya - National. 7 May 2017. Mombasa County health officials have issued an alert over an outbreak of potentially fatal Dengue Fever after 150 cases were diagnosed with the mosquito-borne tropical disease in several health centers across the county. The County Healthy Chief Officer Dr Khadija Shikely said the disease has spread and affected all the 6 sub counties with 119 cases confirmed in major private hospitals by Sun 7 May 2017. Health officials in the county have now enhanced health surveillance and precautionary measures against the disease. Dengue Fever is more prevalent in areas that are crowded and unhygienic. Heavy rains in the region are said to have created new breeding grounds for mosquitoes, which are the vectors transmitting the disease to humans. \"A total of 119 cases were confirmed by Rapid Diagnostic Test Kits in the major private hospitals, Aga Khan, Mombasa Hospital, Al Farouk, Jocham and Seyyid Fatima,\" she said. She said that in total, 150 people have been taken ill with Kisauni reported to have the highest cases at 37 followed by Mvita which has reported 25 patients. Hospitals in Changamwe had by Fri 28 Apr 2017 also confirmed 21 cases and a similar number in Likoni. The disease was 1st detected in Mombasa in 2013 by medical research experts from the Kenya Medical Research Institute (Kemri) in Kilifi. - Kisumu County .21 May 2017. Kisumu County has reported its 1st locally-acquired dengue fever; weeks after some 153 related cases were confirmed in Mombasa. -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail ****** [2] Diagnosis Date: 9 Apr 2017 Source: Courier mail [edited] Doctors are failing to pick up warning signs for a severe form of dengue fever and in 1 in 5 cases are prescribing medicine that would make the patient's condition worse, new research has found. The Australian study of 208 patients hospitalised between January 2012 and May 2015 found doctors were struggling to recognise symptoms associated with severe dengue, which in extreme cases could be deadly. In more than 20 percent of cases patients were prescribed the common painkiller ibuprofen, exposing them to unnecessary risk of haemorrhage. Cairns couple Mena and Ron Crew contracted dengue fever simultaneously and warn of the dangers of the mosquito-borne disease during the wet season in the far north. Queensland Health data available online shows there have been 129 cases of dengue diagnosed in the state so far this year [2017] and 447 cases confirmed last year [2016]. Local outbreaks were identified in Cairns, Innisfail, Townsville, Masig (Yorke) Island, and Boigu Island during the 1st 3 months of the year [2017], but the number of cases reported was dwarfed by those brought back from overseas. Monash Health infectious diseases physician Alex Tai said far north Queensland doctors were generally more familiar with dengue that those in the rest of the country. The study, published in the Medical Journal of Australia today [9 Apr 2017], found Australian travellers most often acquired dengue in Indonesia and Thailand. -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail ****** [3] Vaccine Philippines Date: 16 Apr 2017 Source: Business Mirror [edited] Dengue is a serious public-health concern in the Philippines. It can affect anyone, no matter what the age or social status. It is an illness caused by a mosquito bite. Dengue is normally not fatal, but it could be. In the last 5 decades, dengue has spread from a handful of countries to over 128. The incidence has increased 30-fold in this period. This has been blamed on factors such as unprecedented urbanization and globalization, which has resulted in large mosquito populations living in places with big human populations. This has led to an increased transmission and geographic spread of the virus. Other factors, such as inadequate housing, water, sewage and waste-management systems, have contributed to an increase in the populations of the _Aedes aegypti_ mosquito, which is responsible for dengue. According to the World Health Organization (WHO), over 3.2 million cases were reported in 2015 across the Americas, Southeast Asia and Western Pacific. In 2015 the Philippines reported over 169 000. This represented a 59.5 percent increase from the previous year [2014]. Last year [2016] over 200 000 cases were reported in the country. The Philippines was 7th in the world and 4th overall in Asia Pacific for incidence of dengue from 2004 to 2010. Dengue is scary. There are 4 strains of the virus. My cousin has been infected with 3 of those strains. A doctor has warned that a 4 infection could be fatal. Now for some good news: Health and beauty chain Watsons has announced the availability of dengue vaccination (Dengvaxia) in select stores nationwide. The dengue vaccination was launched in the country by the Department of Health (DOH), together with the Department of Education (DepEd). It was later made available in medical clinics last year [2016]. Watsons is the 1st retailer to offer it in the Philippine market. \"As part of our commitment to improving the lives and health of Filipinos by making health care more accessible to them, we decided to offer dengue vaccination in our select stores nationwide. Dengue is a recurring epidemic in the country, and that's why we recognize the importance of protecting Filipinos against this deadly disease through the vaccination,\" said Danilo Chiong, Watsons Trading Health director. Dengvaxia was created by Sanofi Pasteur, a leading multinational pharmaceutical company and an expert in the development of vaccinations. It took more than 20 years to develop and has been thoroughly tested based on WHO guidelines. Studies of the vaccine included more than 41 000 people and were carried out in 15 countries, including the Philippines. The results were fully reviewed by a committee of independent experts, and the vaccine has also been recommended by the WHO. In the Philippines the DOH, together with the DepEd, launched the much-awaited administration of the dengue vaccine via a school-based immunization approach. The dengue vaccine has also gotten the endorsement of the Philippine Society for Microbiology and Infectious Diseases, and the Philippine College of Physicians. According to a study by the University of the Philippines National Institute of Health, the vaccine is expected to reduce dengue cases in the country by over 24 percent in a span of 5 years. The dengue vaccination, to be taken in 3 doses at 0-6-12 months interval, can protect the individual from all 4 strains of the dengue virus. This can be administered to people age 9 to 45. It will cost P 4000 [USD 80] per dose, or P 12 000 [USD 240] for all 3 doses. The first scheduled dengue vaccination will be on 30 Apr 2018 (1st dose), 29 Oct 2018 (2nd dose) and 29 Apr 2018 (3rd dose); while the 2nd scheduled dengue vacation will be on 14 May 2018 (1st dose), 12 Nov 2018 (2nd dose), 13 May 2018 (3rd dose). This will be available in more than 100 stores nationwide. [Byline: Dinna Chan Vasquez] -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail Malaysia Date: 4 May 2017 Source: The Star [edited] Malaysians should not be too worried about getting severe dengue symptoms from the use of the dengue vaccine because it is not allowed for use by a susceptible age group here, the Malaysian Paediatric Association (MPA) said. Committee member Datuk Dr Zulkifli Ismail said the vaccine, the 1st introduced in the world by Sanofi Pasteur, was only allowed for individuals aged 9 to 45 and not in younger children, who could develop such symptoms after vaccination. He said the phenomenon described by dengue expert Dr Scott Halstead many years ago in patients who had secondary dengue infection was not seen in those who had received the vaccine. Dr Halstead, who 1st identified the antibody-dependent enhancement (ADE) phenomenon, said infection with 1 of the 4 strains of the virus allows a 2nd dengue infection to cause severe illness, including dengue haemorrhagic fever. His ADE theory holds that the longer the interval between infection with different dengue strains, the more severe the disease. ADE was observed following a study on mice and later in Cuba when a less serious outbreak of the type 1 dengue virus was followed by a more severe wave of type 2 dengue cases 1 to 2 decades later. A similar phenomenon was seen in babies born to mothers infected with the dengue virus. It significantly increases the likelihood of the children contracting a severe case of the disease. Dr Zulkifli, who is also the Asia Pacific Paediatric Association secretary-general, was commenting on a recent statement by Health director-general Datuk Dr Noor Hisham Abdullah that one of the possible adverse effects of dengue vaccination was that people could develop severe dengue or get dengue shock syndrome. The National Pharmaceutical Regulatory Agency had announced on its website recently that the vaccine was approved for a post-registration (phase 4) study in Malaysia by the Drug Control Authority for two years and may be used in those aged 9 to 45. Using Sanofi Pasteur's data from phase 3 clinical trials of the vaccine, Dr Halstead and fellow researcher Dr Philip K. Russell showed that - during year 3 of the trial - the dengue hospitalisation rate was higher among children aged 5 or younger who received the vaccine than in the control groups that did not. The trials involved more than 35 000 children in 10 dengue-endemic countries. The data showed that 54.2 percent of the children were seronegative, which means their blood tested negative for the virus, upon enrolment in the trials. Dr Halstead and Dr Russell published their findings in the journal Vaccine in February last year [2016]. Dr Russell had said the company did not directly address the ADE phenomenon nor provided a good explanation for the high risk of hospitalisation among seronegative children. While the company maintained that it only vaccinated children over age 9, Dr Russell said age was \"only a surrogate here for being dengue naive (not exposed to dengue previously). They need to directly address ADE in phase 4 studies.\" Dr Zulkifli argued that there may be many other reasons for the presumably dengue-naive children getting severe dengue as children are not, and should never be, regarded as \"little adults\" physiologically. He said the only way to have proper results on the vaccine's effectiveness on the ground is for it to be used in line with what was approved by the regulatory authorities, and with proper monitoring. [Byline: Loh Foon Fong] -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail ****** [4] Research Encephalitis in Dengue Date: 4 May 2017 Source: PLOS Neglected Tropical Diseases[edited] Our patient with DENV-4 infection developed new acute neurological symptoms of confusion and expressive aphasia at day 6 of her acute dengue illness. CSF showed lymphocytic pleocytosis with a positive CSF dengue IgM and IgG. Testing for other pathogens in CSF was negative. She had not travelled to areas endemic for other flaviviruses. Although DENV-4 has been reported to potentially cause encephalitis, those cases were fatal, with multiorgan involvement and dengue haemorrhagic fever [6,7] By contrast, our patient had no other features of severe dengue, such as severe plasma leakage, bleeding, or other organ impairment. This is the first known case of DENV-4 encephalitis with complete recovery. Citation: Ng DHL, Sadarangani SP (2017) \"Locked in a cage\"--A case of dengue virus 4 encephalitis. PLoS Negl Trop Dis 11(5): e0005369. -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail Optimum Temperature for Mosquitoes Date: 4 May 2017 Source: CCTV News, a Xinhua report [edited] A group of researchers at Stanford University have found that 29 deg C [84 deg F], is the best temperature for mosquito to spread disease. According to a report of PLoS Neglected Tropical Diseases, when temperatures were cooler or warmer, the traits for mosquito to spread diseases, such as dengue, chikungunya and Zika, were lower. Temperature controls several factors that underlie the time it takes for a virus to be transmittable to humans, including how long it takes for a mosquito to ingest a virus during one feeding and then be ready to inject it in a later feeding; the length of the mosquito's life cycle; and how often mosquitoes bite. \"All these traits rely on temperature, but they tend to be nonlinear,\" study lead author Erin Mordecai, an assistant professor of biology, was quoted as saying in a news release. \"They increase to a point and then drop off.\" Before this study, there was a wide range of temperature predictions from other researchers, Mordecai said. And knowing the optimal temperature for disease transmission is critical for predicting future disease rates. \"Dengue epidemics have been on the rise in the past couple decades so there's been a growing effort trying to understand why we're seeing more dengue, and what the relationship is between dengue transmission and climate,\" she explained. The information can help predict how and where disease might spread with climate change, especially in countries that have lower socioeconomic levels, according to Mordecai, as \"concentrated urban poverty is really where you see a lot of vector-borne disease transmission.\" With the new model, researchers are expected to better predict when and where transmission of the next Zika might happen, and allow enough time to prepare for the event. -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail Dengue cases in Bali Date: 22 May 2017 Source: PLOS Neglected trop. Diseases [edited] Abstract A high number of dengue cases are reported annually in Bali. Despite the endemicity, limited data on dengue is available for Bali localities. Molecular surveillance study was conducted to explore the clinical and virological characteristics of dengue patients in urban Denpasar and rural Gianyar areas in Bali during the peak season in 2015. A total of 203 adult dengue-suspected patients were recruited in a prospective cross-sectional study. Demographic and clinical information were obtained, and dengue screening was performed using NS1 and IgM/IgG ELISAs. Viral RNA was subsequently extracted from patients' sera for serotyping using conventional RT-PCR and Simplexa Dengue real-time RT-PCR, followed by genotyping with sequencing method. We confirmed 161 patients as having dengue by NS1 and RT-PCR. Among 154 samples successfully serotyped, the DENV-3 was predominant, followed by DENV-1, DENV-2, and DENV-4. Serotype predominance was different between Denpasar and Gianyar. Genotyping results classify DENV-1 isolates into Genotype I and DENV-2 as Cosmopolitan Genotype. The classification grouped isolates into Genotype I and II for DENV-3 and DENV-4, respectively. Clinical parameters showed no relationship between infecting serotypes and severity. We observed the genetic diversity of circulating DENV isolates and their relatedness with historical data and importation to other countries. Our data highlights the role of this tourist destination as a potential source of dengue transmission in the region. Citation: Megawati D, Masyeni S, Yohan B, et al. Dengue in Bali: Clinical characteristics and genetic diversity of circulating dengue viruses. PLoS Negl Trop Dis. 2017;11(5):e0005483. doi: 10.1371/journal.pntd.0005483 -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail [ A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  .] [", "EBOLA UPDATE (26): NEWS, RESEARCH ********************************* A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases In this update: [1] News Central African Republic Nigeria - Ebola Preparatory Working Group - Ban on repatriation of bodies - Preparation for new outbreak DR Congo - WHO - Infection of pigs - Ebola virus genetics - Improved alerts Zimbabwe: not Ebola [2] Research Polymerase Replikin Operational research Sierra Leone: asymptomatic infection ****** [1] News 25 May 2017 DRC: Congo's Ebola outbreak threatens CAR [Central African Republic] after violence forces thousands across border [An Ebola outbreak in the Democratic Republic of Congo could spread to the neighboring Central African Republic [CAR], where militia violence has forced thousands of people to flee across the border, the World Health Organization [WHO] said on [Thu 25 May 2017]. Since early May [2017], 2 cases of the virus have been confirmed by the WHO in Congo's remote north eastern Bas-Uele province. 4 people have died so far among the 43 suspected and confirmed cases. The affected area's isolation -- it is about 1400 kilometers (870 miles) from the capital Kinshasa -- has helped contain the spread of the highly contagious hemorrhagic fever, experts say. Yet recent attacks by Christian militias in Central African Republic's border town of Bangassou have driven about 2750 people into Bas-Uele, raising the risk that the Ebola outbreak could spread across the border, a WHO representative said. \"There is a big concern about Ebola spreading to Central African Republic after this displacement,\" said Michel Yao, the WHO's representative in the Central African Republic. \"We are worried as the refugees are close to the epicenter of the outbreak,\" he told the Thomson Reuters Foundation, adding they could become infected and carry the virus back home. While this latest Ebola outbreak is Congo's 8th -- the most of any country -- the Central African Republic lacks experience in dealing with such an epidemic, and its health system is weak after 4 years of conflict, Yao said. More than 60 per cent of its health facilities have been damaged or destroyed by the violence since 2013, when mainly Muslim Seleka rebels seized power, triggering reprisals by Christian \"anti-balaka\" militias, according to aid agencies. The Central African Republic set up an Ebola treatment center and rapid response team following the West Africa epidemic, which killed more than 11 300 people between 2014 and 2016, mostly in Guinea, Sierra Leone, and Liberia, WHO said. \"But there is very limited capacity outside of Bangui (the capital) and it is difficult to travel around the country due to the insecurity,\" Yao said. \"We are concerned about how easily Ebola may spread if it arrives in the Central African Republic.\" Health authorities in Congo are monitoring about 365 people who came into contact with sufferers and have dispatched mobile laboratories to the area to speed up testing of people who display symptoms, WHO said in its latest situation report. Asked about the potential for using an experimental vaccine, the WHO last week said the logistics were \"complex\" but that it was working with Congo's government and regulatory authorities. [byline: Kieran Guilbert, Thomson Reuters Foundation] 25 May 2017 Nigeria: Guarding against Ebola outbreak [... In preparation against the spread of the disease to Nigeria this time, the federal government has constituted an Ebola Preparatory Working Group with the mandate to review all protocols and lessons from our response during the last [Ebola virus disease (EVD)] outbreak in the country. The group was also expected to prepare the foundation that the country would build on handling the disease in the event of another outbreak. \"The team is working to compile a list of trained Ebola virus disease case managers and get in immediate contact with them. We are identifying isolation wards that can be used immediately especially in Abuja and Lagos,\" said Professor Isaac Adewole, the health minister.]... 26 May 2017 Nigeria: Government bans repatriation of bodies to check Ebola [The federal government has banned the repatriation of human remains into the country in a bid to prevent the importation of infectious ailments following the recent outbreak of the Ebola virus disease (EVD) in the Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC). The embargo was placed yesterday [25 May 2017] on the heels of the transportation into the country by an airline, Kenya Airways, of a dead Nigerian from Kinshasa. The decision of the government is crucial in the light of the fact that in 2014, \"PS\" introduced [EVD] to Nigeria when he arrived from Liberia. Addressing a press briefing in Lagos, the minister of health, Prof Isaac Adewole and the Lagos state commissioner for health, Dr Jide Idris, said the decision followed a breach of one of the nation's regulations by the foreign carrier. According to the minister, who was represented by Dr Joshua Obasanya, Kenya Airways flew the corpse into Nigeria without getting the necessary clearance from the Port Health Services of the ministry which issues guidelines for waiver before such repatriation is carried out. Adewole said, in line with industry practice, a report had been lodged with the Nigerian Civil Aviation Authority (NCAA) to probe the incident and sanction the airline accordingly just as he disclosed that a high-powered investigation has begun to unravel the immediate and remote intentions of the perpetrator.\" ... 26 May 2017 Nigeria not prepared for another Ebola outbreak [Contrary to assertion by the Nigeria Center for Disease Control (NCDC), indicating that the country is better prepared for another possible outbreak of Ebola virus disease (EVD) now than in 2014, virologist, Prof Oyewale Tomori, said Nigeria is not prepared for another outbreak. Tomori, former president of the Nigerian Academy of Science (NAS) and vice chancellor, Redeemers University, who worked with WHO, said: \"If Ebola strikes in Nigeria, can we rapidly and effectively control it as we did in 2014? My answer is more a 'No' than a 'Yes'. \"The problem is with the poor state of our disease control system -- detection, reporting, sample collection and laboratory diagnosis. It is appreciated that the NCDC is making strenuous efforts to correct this national disaster. However, it will take additional support, funds, and political commitment, to repair the years of damage we have inflicted on our disease surveillance system.\"] ... 26 May 2017 DRC: Ebola outbreak may be smaller than feared, WHO indicates [There are signs that the [Ebola virus disease (EVD)] outbreak in the Democratic Republic of Congo may not be as big as was once feared, WHO officials indicated on Thu [25 May 2017]. Alison Clements-Hunt, a WHO spokeswoman currently in Likati, the epicenter of the response, told STAT in an interview that 14 suspected cases have tested negative for the deadly virus. So far there have been 2 confirmed cases, 4 probable cases, and 4 deaths. Another 40 people are currently listed as suspected cases, said Clements-Hunt. Roughly 300 people who are contacts of known or suspected cases are being monitored to see if they develop symptoms. Clements-Hunt cautioned, though, that in an outbreak the net is cast wide to try to find anyone who might have [EVD], so that they can be isolated and tested. People who are sick with [EVD] but are missed by surveillance can infect family members; if they die and are buried in traditional burial rites, those attending funerals can also be infected. In the early stages of [EVD], symptoms are vague and could be misattributed to other conditions. In an outbreak, it is not uncommon for some suspect cases to later test positive for malaria, say, and negative for Ebola. A mobile laboratory is now operating in Likati, Clements-Hunt said. That will speed up the process of determining the actual scale of the outbreak. A response team of about 50 people from the DRC ministry of health, WHO, UNICEF, and Medecins sans Frontieres (Doctors Without Borders) is in Likati, she said. Among those who tested negative are 5 people who were being cared for in the [EVD] treatment unit that was set up in Likati, Clements-Hunt said. 4 have been released; one is still sick with something else and needs medical care. Given what appears to be the limited scope of the outbreak, the use of an experimental Ebola vaccine may not be required. \"For the time, there doesn't seem that there was really a necessity to do so. I hope it remains the case,\" Dr Marie-Paule Kieny, a WHO assistant director-general, told STAT. That said, Kieny confirmed planning continues to allow for deployment of vaccine, if the government of DRC asks for it. But it may not, she acknowledged.] [communicated by ProMED-mail rapporteur Mary Marshall] 26 May 2017 DRC: Could pigs be involved in Congo's new Ebola outbreak? [It might all just be a big coincidence, but scientists and public health officials are investigating whether pigs are somehow involved in the Ebola outbreak now underway in a remote region of the Democratic Republic of the Congo (DRC). If so, it would add a new -- but not totally unexpected -- chapter to the virus's turbulent history. Scientists' interest stems from 2 data points. An epidemiological investigation has indicated that the 1st person to fall sick was a hunter who had come into contact with a wild boar carcass. In addition, 84 pigs have recently died in 8 villages in Nambwa, the epicenter of the current outbreak, according to a report issued yesterday [25 May 2017] by the DRC's Ministry of Health. Researchers have taken samples from those animals, according to the report, which says a \"protocol for investigation of unusual deaths reported in pigs is under development.\" \"I'm doubtful that the pigs actually carry Ebola, but we have to test them,\" says epidemiologist Fabian Leendertz of the Robert Koch Institute in Berlin, who has been consulted by the Institute of National Biomedical Research in Kinshasa about the potential link. Indeed, pigs in the DRC frequently die from other pathogens; the country often has outbreaks of African swine fever, which has a very high mortality rate. \"Ebola is not even the prime suspect,\" says Anne Rimoin, an epidemiologist from the University of California, Los Angeles, who has worked in the DRC for 15 years and is there now.] ... [An earlier study on susceptibility and pathogenicity of Ebola in pigs was conducted by Kobinger GP et al: Replication, pathogenicity, shedding, and transmission of _Zaire ebolavirus_ in pigs. J Infect Dis. 2011; 204(2): 200-8;  , which demonstrated laboratory infection of pigs with _Zaire ebolavirus_ [ZEBOV]. They went on to show in Weingartl HM: Transmission of Ebola virus from pigs to non-human primates. Sci Rep. 2012;2:811; ] that infected pigs can efficiently transmit ZEBOV to NHPs [non-human primates] in conditions resembling farm setting. [Their] findings support the hypothesis that airborne transmission may contribute to ZEBOV spread, specifically from pigs to primates, and may need to be considered in assessing transmission from animals to humans in general. The present experimental findings would explain REBOV [_Reston ebolavirus_] seropositivity of pig farmers in Philippines that were not involved in slaughtering or had no known contact with contaminated pig tissues. The results of this study also raise a possibility that wild or domestic pigs may be a natural (non-reservoir) host for EBOV participating in the EBOV transmission to other species in sub-Saharan Africa. See full article for references - Mod.LK] 26 May 2017 DRC: Genetic testing under way on virus behind new Ebola outbreak [Tests are under way to determine the genetic sequence of the [Ebola virus disease (EVD)] behind an outbreak in central Africa, a US Centers for Disease Control [CDC] researcher said on [Fri 26 May 2017]. Dr Barbara Knust, an epidemiologist, told VOA's [Voice of America] Horn of Africa service that scientists are looking for \"clues\" about where this strain of Ebola originated and how to treat it. \"That could help [us] understand how this virus is related to other viruses that have caused other Ebola outbreaks,\" she said. Staff from CDC, WHO, the Congolese Ministry of Health, and other agencies are in Congo's Bas Uele province, working to contain the spread of the virus. Knust said the international response was going \"fine\". The latest Ebola outbreak is in northern Democratic Republic of the Congo, in a remote area near the border with the Central African Republic. WHO said that as of [24 May 2017], Ebola had killed 4 people in the area and the number of suspected cases stood at 44.] ... 26 May 2017 (DRC): New Ebola cases may show effect of improved alerts, global official says [The rapid reaction by the Democratic Republic of Congo [DRC] to recent cases of Ebola showed lessons were learned from earlier outbreaks, a top global health official said on [Fri 26 May 2017], stressing the need to factor health into disaster risk plans. Since early May [2017], 2 cases of the virus have been confirmed by the [WHO] in DRC's remote north eastern Bas-Uele province. 4 people have died so far among the 43 suspected and confirmed cases. With the improved activation of early alert systems and emergency teams in Congo, \"hopefully we will not get into a full-blown outbreak like it was a few years before\", the secretary general of the International Red Cross and Red Cross Societies told the Thomson Reuters Foundation in an interview. \"This is very different from what we experienced in Liberia, Senegal, and Guinea, where the outbreak was happening for the 1st time ever,\" said Elhadj As Sy. \"People couldn't recognize it in time,\" he said. [Ebola virus disease (EVD)] in West Africa killed more than 11 300 between 2014 and 2016. Sy said the remote location in Congo -- about 1400 kilometers (870 miles) from the capital Kinshasa -- meant the highly contagious hemorrhagic fever was \"quasi-quarantining itself.\" \"One is this time building on the past experience in the Democratic Republic of Congo in the last outbreak as well as lessons learned in the last outbreak,\" he said.] ... 23 May 2017 Zimbabwe: no Ebola in Zimbabwe - Health Ministry [The Ministry of Health and Child Care has dismissed reports of an outbreak of Ebola or \"Ebola like\" diseases in Hwange District in Matabeleland North Province. Matabeleland North provincial medical director, Dr Nyasha Masuka, said members of the public must not panic as there had been no deaths related to Ebola in the province. He said some tests conducted on patients showed that some of the 42 people who were recently admitted to Lukosi Hospital complaining of headaches, high temperatures among others were suffering from malaria. They were also waiting for results for the other patients. Dr Masuka said the 42 cases were recorded in April [2017] and early this month [May], but no new cases were reported in the last 2 weeks. \"There is no [Ebola virus disease (EVD)] or 'Ebola like' symptoms that have been detected within the province and people must not panic as it is not true. Yes, about 42 people from five villages in Hwange District were tested after they showed some kind of symptoms, although none of them showed [EVD] symptoms,\" he said. \"Most patients were admitted for 3 to 4 days and were given antibiotics and paracetamol. In some people, tests for malaria turned out negative.\" Dr Masuka said a health team was on the ground investigating. \"We want to establish if the cases came from one village or a cluster of homesteads. We are also conducting investigations if there were any public gatherings like funerals or church meetings in those areas where the cases came from to see whether there might be a certain bug that might have hit the area. \"Our health team is on high alert towards the seasonal changes, especially after so much rain. A lot of bugs may manifest and naturally people are bound to suffer from diseases such as viral colds, malaria and others,\" he said. - state media.] ****** [2] Research 23 May 2017: An increase in the Ebola gene polymerase Replikin Count from 2014-2015 preceded the current Ebola outbreak [A similar increase in Replikin Count in 2012-13 preceded the 2014 [Ebola virus disease (EVD)] outbreak and no other data-driven genomic analysis is known for predicting the onset of a viral outbreak or pandemic. Ebola resurfaces in the Democratic Republic of Congo with 4 deaths and 20 suspected cases now reported, a new analysis of the Ebola gene polymerase Replikin Count, via the PubMed database, showed a correlation between the 2014 and 2017 outbreaks of the disease. Ebola gene Replikin Counts rose sharply in 2012-13, which preceded the 2014 outbreak. An analysis of the latest data showed another rise in the [EVD] gene Replikin counts in 2014-15, which again precedes the current outbreak in the DRC. Sequence data for 2016 and 2017 are not yet available from PubMed. \"The ability to predict an outbreak or pandemic a year or more before its onset can help save hundreds if not thousands of lives,\" noted Samuel Bogoch, chairman of Replikins Ltd, a Boston-based biotechnology firm that has analyzed and tracked the genomic sequences of some of today's most lethal infectious diseases including SARS coronavirus [SARS-CoV disease], MERS-CoV Middle East respiratory syndrome coronavirus [MERS-CoV ] and others. The objective, quantitative, automated Ebola gene Replikin Count measure of an increase may be the only such gene data available and has been submitted for publication in The Lancet and Science. It suggests that there should be no hesitation in instituting the maximal immediate response to the current outbreak of the Ebola virus with its 40-70 per cent lethality rate. The genomic data Dr Bogoch and his colleagues have analyzed may be useful in the current debate about how and when to respond to the present Ebola outbreak. \"Uncertainty about the severity and course of the current Ebola outbreak may again delay implementation of maximal defensive moves,\" he added. Time is being lost, as was the case in the 2014 Ebola outbreak when 11 000 people died. Public health officials are addressing these questions: - Is it time to advise against travel to the area? - Should maximal efforts be made at this time to obtain WHO and national government clearance for the immediate application of early promising ring vaccine candidates? Replikins are a group of gene peptides discovered by Drs Sam and Elenore Bogoch that are associated with rapid replication; they are 7 to 50 amino acids long and are sequences that are specific to amino acids, and spaces between that are identified and counted by an automated process. The Bogochs' research has shown that Replikin concentration increases before outbreaks and decreases before cessation.] 26 May 2017: Operational research during the Ebola emergency [ref: Fitzpatrick G, Decroo T, Draguez B, et al. Operational research during the Ebola emergency. Emerg Infect Dis. 2017; 23(7); doi: 10.3201/eid2307.161389 Abstract. Operational research aims to identify interventions, strategies, or tools that can enhance the quality, effectiveness, or coverage of programs where the research is taking place. M\u00e9decins Sans Fronti\u00e8res admitted less than/equal to 5200 patients with confirmed Ebola virus disease during the Ebola outbreak in West Africa and from the beginning nested operational research within its emergency response. This research covered critical areas, such as understanding how the virus spreads, clinical trials, community perceptions, challenges within Ebola treatment centers, and negative effects on non-Ebola healthcare. Importantly, operational research questions were decided to a large extent by returning volunteers who had first-hand knowledge of the immediate issues facing teams in the field. Such a method is appropriate for an emergency medical organization. Many challenges were also identified while carrying out operational research across 3 different countries, including the basic need for collecting data in standardized format to enable comparison of findings between treatment centers.] ... [communicated by ProMED-mail rapporteur Mary Marshall] June 2017. Sierra Leone: asymptomatic Ebola virus infection [ref: Glynn JR, Bower H, Johnson S, et al. Asymptomatic infection and unrecognised Ebola virus disease in Ebola-affected households in Sierra Leone: a cross-sectional study using a new non-invasive assay for antibodies to Ebola virus. Lancet Infect Dis. 2017; 17(6): 645-53; pii: S1473-3099(17)30111-1. (Published: 27 Feb 2017) Excerpt -------  \"...we have used a non-invasive assay to show that asymptomatic Ebola virus infection occurs, but accounted for only a small proportion of infections, so would have little effect on herd immunity. It is unknown whether those with asymptomatic Ebola virus infection are infectious, or could harbour virus in the long term, like some survivors. In that respect, the low proportion of asymptomatic infections is reassuring because these transmissions would be challenging to prevent. We also identified missed symptomatic cases, some of which were mild. Many questions remain, including why some people escape infection or disease despite high exposure, and whether those asymptomatically infected will have any immunity in future outbreaks.] ...\" [communicated by ProMED-mail rapporteur Mary Marshall] [compiled by: Celeste Whitlow ] -- communicated by: ProMED-mail [A map of the affected area in north east Congo DR can be seen at  and a HealthMap/ProMED-mail map of the DRC at  . - Mod.LK] [", "HEPATITIS E - NIGER (04): (DIFFA) FATAL, PREGNANT WOMEN ******************************************************* A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Thu 26 May 2017 Source: Voice of America Africa with Agence France-Presse (AFP) [in French, machine trans., edited] At least 30 deaths of hepatitis E in south eastern Niger -------------------------------------------------------- Hepatitis E has killed 30 people in the Diffa region of south eastern Niger, close to Nigeria, home to some 300 000 displaced and refugees who fled the violence of the Nigerian jihadist group Boko Haram. \"A total of 664 suspected and confirmed cases were reported on 23 May 2017. On the same date, 30 deaths related to the disease were recorded,\" reported the UN Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) Niamey, on its website. A previous report dated 19 Apr 2017 reported 25 deaths and 86 reported cases. Women account for 60 per cent of the patients of this contagious disease which affects the age group of more than 15 years. The authorities, the World Health Organization (WHO), M\u00e9decins Sans Fronti\u00e8res (MSF), and UNICEF have launched \"awareness-raising\" campaigns and provide \"free patients\". In the field, NGOs are working to improve access to drinking water and a \"response plan\" to the USD 9 million epidemic has been prepared. Elmounzer Ag Jiddou, MSF's head of mission in Niger, urged the country's authorities and all organizations to \"ensure adequate water supply and sanitation\". To curb the scourge, the Nigerian Ministry of Health regularly calls \"populations to vigilance\" and to go to a health center as soon as symptoms appear. Fever, headache, vomiting, abdominal pain, and dark urine are the main signs of hepatitis E, a liver disease caused by a virus that is transmitted fecally-orally, mainly via contaminated water. The Diffa region, which has suffered attacks from Boko Haram since 2015, is home to more than 300 000 refugees and displaced persons, thousands of whom live at the expense of a very poor local population, according to the UN. -- communicated by: ProMED-FRA [Maps of Niger can be seen at and . The following regarding hepatitis E virus infection during pregnancy is extracted from: Chaudhry SA, Verma N, Koren G. Hepatitis E infection during pregnancy. Can Fam Physician. 2015; 61(7): 607-8;  . \"Hepatitis E infection during pregnancy and in the 3rd trimester, especially with genotype 1, is associated with more severe infection and might lead to fulminant hepatic failure and maternal death (11-13). Although the mechanism of liver injury is not yet clear, it is possible that interplay of hormonal and immunologic changes during pregnancy, along with a high viral load of HEV, renders the woman more vulnerable (14). Immunologic changes during pregnancy promote the maintenance of the fetus in the maternal environment by suppression of T cell-mediated immunity, rendering pregnant women more susceptible to viral infections like HEV infection. During pregnancy, levels of progesterone, estrogen, and human chorionic gonadotropin increase as pregnancy advances. These hormones play a considerable role in altering immune regulation and increasing viral replications (15). Hepatitis E infection with genotype 1 during the 3rd trimester can lead to maternal mortality in up to 15 per cent to 25 per cent of cases (16). Most of the studies showing high maternal mortality are from India, where infection occurs in epidemics. There is a very high risk of vertical transmission of HEV from the mother to the fetus. During a Delhi epidemic, a hospital-based study revealed that HEV infection during pregnancy was associated with miscarriage, stillbirth, or neonatal death in 56 per cent of infants (6). One recent study highlights that HEV infection might be responsible for 2400 to 3000 stillbirths each year in developing countries, with many additional fetal deaths linked to antenatal maternal deaths (11). There is a very high risk of preterm delivery in pregnant women with HEV infection, with poor neonatal survival rates (11,17). In 2 separate studies from India, 15 per cent to 50 per cent of live-born infants of mothers with HEV infection died within 1 week of birth (11,18). During an outbreak in Sudan in 2010 to 2011, among 39 pregnant women with HEV infection there were 14 intrauterine deaths and 9 premature deliveries (19).\" References ---------- 6. Naidu SS, Viswanathan R. Infectious hepatitis in pregnancy during Delhi epidemic. Indian J Med Res. 1957; 45(Suppl): 71-76. 11. Patra S, Kumar A, Trivedi SS, Puri M, Sarin SK. Maternal and fetal outcomes in pregnant women with acute hepatitis E virus infection. Ann Intern Med. 2007; 147(1): 28-33; abstract available at  . 12. Teo CG. Fatal outbreaks of jaundice in pregnancy and the epidemic history of hepatitis E. Epidemiol Infect. 2012; 140(5): 767-87; abstract available at . 13. Devi SG, Kumar A, Kar P, Husain SA, Sharma S. Association of pregnancy outcome with cytokine gene polymorphisms in HEV infection during pregnancy. J Med Virol. 2014; 86(8): 1366-76; abstract available at  . 14. Fiore S, Savasi V. Treatment of viral hepatitis in pregnancy. Expert Opin Pharmacother. 2009; 10(17): 2801-2809; abstract available at . 15. Navaneethan U, Al Mohajer M, Shata MT. Hepatitis E and pregnancy: understanding the pathogenesis. Liver Int. 2008; 28(9): 1190-9; available at . 16. Ranger-Rogez S, Alain S, Denis F. Hepatitis viruses: mother to child transmission [in French]. Pathol Biol (Paris) 2002; 50(9): 568-75; abstract available at  . 17. Krain LJ, Atwell JE, Nelson KE, Labrique AB. Fetal and neonatal health consequences of vertically transmitted hepatitis E virus infection. Am J Trop Med Hyg. 2014; 90(2): 365-70; available at  . 18. Rasheeda CA, Navaneethan U, Jayanthi V. Liver disease in pregnancy and its influence on maternal and fetal mortality: a prospective study from Chennai, Southern India. Eur J Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2008; 20(4): 362-4. 19. Rayis DA, Jumaa AM, Gasim GI, Karsany MS, Adam I. An outbreak of hepatitis E and high maternal mortality at Port Sudan, Eastern Sudan. Pathog Glob Health. 2013; 107(2): 66-8;  . - Mod.LL] [", "LEISHMANIASIS, CUTANEOUS - NEPAL (02) ************************************* A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases [1] Date: Sat 27 May 2017 Source: EpiCore Global Surveillance Project [edited] Cutaneous leishmaniasis [CL] is not endemic in Nepal, but saying extremely rare might be an understatement. Sporadic cases of CL have been reported from hospitals of Nepal from the eastern and central regions using staining, culture, and PCR analysis. -- communicated by: ProMED-mail ****** [2] Date: Fri 26 May 2017 Source: EpiCore Global Surveillance Project [edited] Among the 4 cases I treated; one female was from Tanahu District, Nepal with travel history to Chitawan District, Nepal; 2 cases were from Dolpa District, Nepal (one female resident of Dolpa without travel history and another from the Kathmandu with history of visit and stay longer to Dolpa Nepal); and one female from Makawanpur District, Nepal without travel history. 8 cases were reported from the western region of Nepal and 2 cases from eastern Nepal. -- communicated by: EpiCore Surveillance Project member Dr Anup Bastola Consultant Tropical Medicine Physician Sukraraj Tropical and Infectious Disease Hospital, Teku Kathmandu Nepal [ProMED-mail thanks the EpiCore Global Surveillance Project members who submitted responses to our request for further information. They indeed confirm that cutaneous leishmaniasis is rare in Nepal, but most probably increasing. - Mod.EP Maps of Nepal can be seen at  and  . - Sr.Tech.Ed.MJ] [", "ZIKA VIRUS (10) - AMERICAS, ASIA, MIDDLE EAST, RESEARCH ******************************************************* A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases In this update: [1] Cases in various countries: Americas Americas cumulative case numbers North America --- Florida (Miami area) Central America --- Belize Caribbean --- Cuba USA Virgin Islands South America --- Brazil Asia --- India (Ahmedabad, Gujarat state) Imported cases with no possibility of ongoing mosquito transmission --- Israel USA: - Case numbers mainland - Territories and Commonwealth [2] Virus mutation [3] Cryptic transmission [4] Virus evolution and spread [5] Adolescent cognitive impairment [6] Maternal-fetal transmission in monkeys [7] Intravaginal, intrarectal transmission, macaques [8] Vaccine trial difficulty ****** Cases in various countries Americas --- Americas cumulative case numbers As of 25 May 2017 Country / Locally acquired: suspected / Confirmed [conf] / Imported / Deaths / Conf congenital syndrome North America: Bermuda / 0 / 0 / 6 / 0 / 0 Canada / 0 / 0 / 499 / 0 / 1 USA / 0 / 225 / 5010 / 0 / 72 Latin America: Mexico / 0 / 8762 / 15 / 0 / 5 Central American Isthmus: Belize / 1294 / 206 / 0 / 0 / 0 Costa Rica / 6352 / 1806 / 32 / 0 / 5 El Salvador / 11 514 / 51 / 0 / 0 / 4 Guatemala / 3634 / 921 / 0 / 0 / 59 Honduras / 32 130 / 302 / 0 / 0 / 4 Nicaragua / 0 / 2060 / 3 / 0 / 2 Panam\u00e1 / 4178 / 969 / 42 / 0 / 7 Latin Caribbean: Cuba / 0 / 187 / 58 / 0 / 0 Dominican Republic / 4906 / 345 / 0 / 0 / 93 French Guiana / 10 385 / 483 / 10 / 0 / 17 Guadeloupe / 30 845 / 382 / 0 / 0 / 18 Haiti / 2955 / 5 / 0 / 0 / 1 Martinique / 36 680 / 21 / 0 / 0 /23 Puerto Rico / 0 / 40 274 / 137 / 5 / 35 Saint Barthelemy / 990 / 61 / 0 / 0 / 0 Saint Martin / 3280 / 200 / 0 / 0 / 1 Non-Latin Caribbean: Anguilla / 29 / 23 / 1/ 0 / 0 Antigua and Barbuda / 465 / 14 / 2 / 0 / 0 Aruba / 1208 / 468 / 7 / 0 / 0 Bahamas / 0 / 25 / 3/ 0 / 0 Barbados / 705 / 150 / 0 / 0 / 1 Bonaire, St Eustatius and Saba / 235 / 381 / 0 / 0 / 0 Caymans / 232 / 31 / 10 / 0 / 0 Curacao / 2589 / 1259 / 0 / 0 / 0 Dominica / 1154 / 79 / 0 / 0 / 0 Grenada / 335 / 118 / 0 / 0 / 2 Guyana / 0 / 37 / 0 / 0 / 0 Jamaica / 7655 / 203 / 0 / 0 / 0 Montserrat / 18 / 5 / 0 / 0 / 0 Saint Kits and Nevis / 554 / 33 / 0 / 0 / 0 Saint Lucia / 822 / 50 / 0 / 0 / 0 Saint Vincent and the Grenadines / 508 / 83 / 0 / 0 / 0 Saint Maarten / 247 / 147 / 0 / 0 / 0 Suriname / 2768 / 723 / 0 / 4 / 4 Trinidad and Tobago / 0 / 718 / 1 / 0 / 3 Turks and Caicos / 201 / 25 / 3 / 0 / 0 Virgin Islands (UK) / 74 / 52 / 0 / 0 / 0 Virgin Islands (USA) / 1093 / 1026 / 2 / 0 / 0 Andean Area: Bolivia / 1767 / 585 / 4 / 0 / 14 Colombia / 98 020 / 9802 / 0 / 0 / 155 Ecuador / 3972 / 1013 / 22 / 0 / 0 Peru / 5434 / 1006 / 22 / 0 / 0 Venezuela / 59 965 / 2413 / 0 / 0 / 0 [Brazil and] Southern Cone: Brazil / 223 230 / 133 527 / 0 / 11 / 2698 Argentina / 869 / 99 / 40 / 0 / 2 Chile / 0 / 0 / 34 / 0 / 0 Paraguay / 668 / 16 / 0 / 0 / 2 Uruguay / 0 / 0 / 1 / 0 / 0 Totals, Americas / 563 960 / 211 695 / 5957 / 20 / 3231 [Maps showing the location of the affected islands and countries in the Americas mentioned above and below can be accessed at  ; North America at ; Central America at ; Caribbean at and South America at . - Mod.TY] North America --- Florida (Miami area). 25 May 2017. (reported) Mosquitoes there started picking up the virus from infected travelers as early as March last year [2016], according to scientists who examined genetic information from samples from about 30 people with Zika as well as from mosquitoes. It wasn't until July [2016] that Florida health officials said they had detected a local infection - the 1st in the US mainland. [A recent study to gain insights into the timing, source, and likely route(s) of ZIKV introduction, the authors tracked the virus from its 1st detection in Florida by sequencing ZIKV genomes from infected patients and _Aedes aegypti_ mosquitoes. They showed that at least 4 introductions, but potentially as many as 40, contributed to the outbreak in Florida and that local transmission is likely to have started in the spring of 2016 -- several months before its initial detection ( ). This report was provided by ProMED-mail rapporteur Mary Marshall. - Mod.TY] Central America --- Belize. 26 May 2017. November 2016 - April 2017 (conf) 124 cases. Caribbean --- Cuba. 18 May 2017. (reported) [since 2017] 1847 cases [numbers of cases imported or locally acquired not indicated]. USA Virgin Islands. 23 May 2017. (conf) 1019 cases: case counts by island: Saint Thomas (reported) 1247 cases, (conf) 681 cases; Saint Croix (reported) 730 cases, (conf) 250 cases; Saint John (reported) 140 cases, (conf) 88 cases; ff the pregnant women tested for all islands, 238 were positive for Zika virus infection. South America --- Brazil. 27 May 2017. Microcephaly since beginning of outbreak in November 2015 (suspected [susp]) 10 905 cases, (conf) 2698 cases; microcephaly and other developmental alterations up to 22 Apr 2017 (susp) 936 cases, (registered) 246 cases. [in Spanish] Asia --- India (Ahmedabad, Gujarat state). 26 May 2017 (conf) 1st locally acquired 3 cases in the Bapunagar area, Ahmedabad District, including 2 pregnant women who delivered normal babies. These cases indicate that there is low-level Zika virus circulation in this part of India. [This report was provided by ProMED-mail rapporteur Mary Marshall. - Mod.TY] [Maps of India can be seen at  and  . - Mod.TY] Imported cases with no possibility of ongoing mosquito transmission --- Israel. 21 May 2017. (reported) approximately 20 cases, all imported, however, the Health Ministry said that the Asian tiger mosquito [_Aedes albopictus_], which is known to transmit the virus, is common in Israel. USA: - case numbers mainland. Zika virus disease in the United States, 1 Jan 2017 - 24 May 2017 State / Symptomatic cases / Viremic blood donors Alabama / 3 / 0 Arizona / 1 / 0 California / 13 / 1 Colorado / 3 / 0 Florida / 14 / 3 Georgia / 1 / 0 Illinois / 4 / 0 Indiana / 1 / 0 Iowa / 1 / 0 Kansas / 2 / 0 Kentucky / 1 / 0 Louisiana / 1 / 0 Maine / 1 / 0 Maryland / 3 / 0 Massachusetts / 5 / 0 Michigan / 6 / 0 Mississippi / 2 / 0 Missouri / 1 / 0 New Jersey / 2 / 0 New York / 24 / 1 North Carolina / 3 / 0 Ohio / 3 / 0 Oregon / 1 / 0 Pennsylvania / 3 / 0 Rhode Island / 2 / 0 Texas / 10 / 1 Vermont / 2 / 0 Virginia / 3 / 0 Washington / 2 / 0 West Virginia / 0 / 2 Wisconsin / 2 / 0 Total / 121 / 8 - Territories and Commonwealth: Location / Symptomatic / Blood donors American Samoa / 3 / 0 Puerto Rico / 459 / 3 US Virgin Islands / 36 / 0 Total / 498 / 3 [A map of the USA showing the states and territories mentioned above can be accessed at . - Mod.TY] -- communicated by: ProMED-mail and Roland H\u00fcbner Superior Health Council Brussels Belgium ****** [2] Virus mutation Date: Thu 25 May 2017 Source: Nature doi:10.1038/nature22365 [edited] ref: Liu Y, Liu J, Du S, et al. Evolutionary enhancement of Zika virus infectivity in _Aedes aegypti_ mosquitoes. Nature. 2017;545(7655):482-486. doi: 10.1038/nature22365 ---------------------------------------------------------------------- Abstract -------- Zika virus (ZIKV) remained obscure until the recent explosive outbreaks in French Polynesia (2013-2014) and South America (2015-2016). Phylogenetic studies have shown that ZIKV has evolved into African and Asian lineages. The Asian lineage of ZIKV was responsible for the recent epidemics in the Americas. However, the underlying mechanisms through which ZIKV rapidly and explosively spread from Asia to the Americas are unclear. Non-structural protein 1 (NS1) facilitates flavivirus acquisition by mosquitoes from an infected mammalian host and subsequently enhances viral prevalence in mosquitoes. Here we show that NS1 antigenaemia determines ZIKV infectivity in its mosquito vector _Aedes aegypti_, which acquires ZIKV via a blood meal. Clinical isolates from the most recent outbreak in the Americas were much more infectious in mosquitoes than the FSS13025 strain, which was isolated in Cambodia in 2010. Further analyses showed that these epidemic strains have higher NS1 antigenaemia than the FSS13025 strain because of an alanine-to-valine amino acid substitution at residue 188 in NS1. ZIKV infectivity was enhanced by this amino acid substitution in the ZIKV FSS13025 strain in mosquitoes that acquired ZIKV from a viraemic C57BL/6 mouse deficient in type I and II interferon (IFN) receptors (AG6 mouse). Our results reveal that ZIKV evolved to acquire a spontaneous mutation in its NS1 protein, resulting in increased NS1 antigenaemia. Enhancement of NS1 antigenaemia in infected hosts promotes ZIKV infectivity and prevalence in mosquitoes, which could have facilitated transmission during recent ZIKV epidemics. -- communicated by: ProMED-mail [This interesting report indicates the occurrence of a mutation in the genome of the Zika virus strains from the Americas that promotes the infectivity of these viruses for _Aedes aegypti_ vector mosquitoes. The _Ae. aegypti_ mosquito used in these experiments was the Rockefeller strain, which has been maintained in laboratory colonies for many years. It would be interesting to repeat the susceptibility tests using wild-type _Ae. aegypti_ from the Americas, in parallel with the Rockefeller strain mosquitoes, as an indication of what may be occurring in nature. - Mod.TY] ****** [3] Cryptic transmission Date: Wed 24 May 2017 Source: Nature doi:10.1038/nature22401 [edited] ref: Faria NR, Quick J, Claro IM, et al. Establishment and cryptic transmission of Zika virus in Brazil and the Americas. Nature. 2017. doi: 10.1038/nature22401 -------------------------------------------------------------------- Abstract -------- Transmission of Zika virus (ZIKV) in the Americas was 1st confirmed in May 2015 in north east Brazil. Brazil has had the highest number of reported ZIKV cases worldwide (more than 200 000 by 24 Dec 2016) and the most cases associated with microcephaly and other birth defects (2366 confirmed by 31 Dec 2016). Since the initial detection of ZIKV in Brazil, more than 45 countries in the Americas have reported local ZIKV transmission, with 24 of these reporting severe ZIKV-associated disease. However, the origin and epidemic history of ZIKV in Brazil and the Americas remain poorly understood, despite the value of this information for interpreting observed trends in reported microcephaly. Here we address this issue by generating 54 complete or partial ZIKV genomes, mostly from Brazil, and reporting data generated by a mobile genomics laboratory that travelled across northeast Brazil in 2016. One sequence represents the earliest confirmed ZIKV infection in Brazil. Analyses of viral genomes with ecological and epidemiological data yield an estimate that ZIKV was present in northeast Brazil by February 2014 and is likely to have disseminated from there, nationally and internationally, before the 1st detection of ZIKV in the Americas. Estimated dates for the international spread of ZIKV from Brazil indicate the duration of pre-detection cryptic transmission in recipient regions. The role of north east Brazil in the establishment of ZIKV in the Americas is further supported by geographic analysis of ZIKV transmission potential and by estimates of the basic reproduction number of the virus. -- communicated by: ProMED-mail ****** [4] Virus evolution and spread Date: Wed 24 May 2017 Source: Nature doi:10.1038/nature22402 [edited] ref: Metsky HC, Matranga CB, Wohl S, et al. Zika virus evolution and spread in the Americas. Nature. 2017. doi: 10.1038/nature22402 -------------------------------------------------------------------- Abstract -------- Although the recent Zika virus (ZIKV) epidemic in the Americas and its link to birth defects have attracted a great deal of attention, much remains unknown about ZIKV disease epidemiology and ZIKV evolution, in part owing to a lack of genomic data. Here we address this gap in knowledge by using multiple sequencing approaches to generate 110 ZIKV genomes from clinical and mosquito samples from 10 countries and territories, greatly expanding the observed viral genetic diversity from this outbreak. We analysed the timing and patterns of introductions into distinct geographic regions; our phylogenetic evidence suggests rapid expansion of the outbreak in Brazil and multiple introductions of outbreak strains into Puerto Rico, Honduras, Colombia, other Caribbean islands, and the continental United States. We find that ZIKV circulated undetected in multiple regions for many months before the 1st locally transmitted cases were confirmed, highlighting the importance of surveillance of viral infections. We identify mutations with possible functional implications for ZIKV biology and pathogenesis, as well as those that might be relevant to the effectiveness of diagnostic tests. -- communicated by: ProMED-mail rapporteur Mary Marshall [One hopes that a repository of low-passage Zika virus from a wide variety of locations and over time has been established for additional studies of pathogenesis and virus-vector relationships. - Mod.TY] ****** [5] Adolescent cognitive impairment Date: Tue 6 Jun 2017 Source: Emerg Infect Dis. 2017;23(6):1047-1048 [edited] ref: Zucker J, Neu N, Chiriboga CA, et al. Zika virus-associated cognitive impairment in adolescent, 2016. Emerg Infect Dis. 2017;23(6):1047-1048. doi: 10.3201/eid2306.162029. ---------------------------------------------------------------- Abstract -------- Incidence of neurologic manifestations associated with Zika virus infection has been increasing. In 2016, neuropsychological and cognitive changes developed in an adolescent after travel to a Zika virus-endemic area. Single-photon emission computed tomography and neuropsychological testing raised the possibility that Zika virus infection may lead to neuropsychiatric and cognitive symptoms. Conclusion ---------- Although we cannot entirely rule out Epstein-Barr virus as a possible trigger, the length of time between previous infection and onset of neuropsychological symptoms would be unusual. In addition, although it is impossible to exclude contributions of coinfection from other mosquitoborne viruses (for example, dengue and chikungunya), given the Zika virus positivity on RT-PCR, the patient's condition met criteria for definitive Zika virus infection and the CSF IgM titer was consistent with CNS involvement of Zika virus. The changes on single-photon emission computed tomographs and neuropsychological test scores raise the possibility that Zika virus infection may trigger neuropsychiatric and cognitive symptoms. Although we cannot prove that the patient's symptoms were related to Zika virus, clinicians should be aware of this potential association and the value of closely monitoring patients with Zika virus infection. -- communicated by: ProMED-mail [Although this report is of a single patient, it does bring up the possibility that Zika virus infection of adolescents may cause neuropsychological and cognitive changes. Clinicians attending these patients should be aware of these possibilities. - Mod.TY] ****** [6] Maternal-fetal transmission in monkeys Date: Thu 25 May 2017 [ahead of print] Source: PLoS Pathogens https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.ppat.1006378 [edited] ref: Nguyen SM, Antony KM, Dudley DM, et al. Highly efficient maternal-fetal Zika virus transmission in pregnant rhesus macaques. PLoS Pathog. 2017;13(5):e1006378. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1006378 ------------------------------------------------------------------- Abstract -------- Infection with Zika virus (ZIKV) is associated with human congenital fetal anomalies. To model fetal outcomes in nonhuman primates, we administered Asian-lineage ZIKV subcutaneously to 4 pregnant rhesus macaques. While non-pregnant animals in a previous study contemporary with the current report clear viremia within 10-12 days, maternal viremia was prolonged in 3 of 4 pregnancies. Fetal head growth velocity in the last month of gestation determined by ultrasound assessment of head circumference was decreased in comparison with biparietal diameter and femur length within each fetus, both within normal range. ZIKV RNA was detected in tissues from all 4 fetuses at term cesarean section. In all pregnancies, neutrophilic infiltration was present at the maternal-fetal interface (decidua, placenta, fetal membranes), in various fetal tissues, and in fetal retina, choroid, and optic nerve (1st trimester infection only). Consistent vertical transmission in this primate model may provide a platform to assess risk factors and test therapeutic interventions for interruption of fetal infection. The results may also suggest that maternal-fetal ZIKV transmission in human pregnancy may be more frequent than currently appreciated. Author summary -------------- Maternal ZIKV infection in pregnancy is associated with severe fetal anomalies, including microcephaly. It has been shown that infection manifests differently in pregnancy than in the non-pregnant state, with prolonged maternal viremia. ZIKV is spread by mosquitoes and through sexual contact and since its 1st detection in early 2015, has become endemic to the Americas. While much has been learned from studying infected human pregnancies, there are still many questions concerning transmission of ZIKV from mother to fetus. Investigating ZIKV infection in non-human primates could help answer these questions due to similarities in the immune system and the tissues separating the fetus from the mother during pregnancy. Our study serves to model ZIKV transmission in early and late pregnancy, as well as study the effects of this infection on the fetus and mother at these different times in pregnancy. The data collected provides an important insight on ZIKV in pregnancy where the pregnancies have been monitored throughout the entire infection period until term, and suggests that vertical transmission may be very efficient, although severe fetal outcomes are uncommon. -- communicated by: ProMED-mail [Although an expensive model system, this study indicates that pregnant rhesus monkeys may be a reliable system biologically close to humans. Several drugs have been reported to interfere with Zika virus replication cycles. It will be interesting to see results if these drugs are tested in this pregnant rhesus monkey model system. - Mod.TY] ****** [7] Intravaginal, intrarectal transmission, macaques Date: 26 May 2017 [expedited ahead of print] Source: Emerg Infect Dis. https://doi.org/10.3201/eid2308170036 [edited] ref: Haddow AD, Nalca A, Rossi FD, et al. High infection rates for adult macaques after intravaginal or intrarectal inoculation with Zika virus. Emerg Infect Dis. 2017;23(8). doi: 10.3201/eid2308.170036 ---------------------------------------------------------------------- Abstract -------- Unprotected sexual intercourse between persons residing in or traveling from regions with Zika virus transmission is a risk factor for infection. To model risk for infection after sexual intercourse, we inoculated rhesus and cynomolgus macaques with Zika virus by intravaginal or intrarectal routes. In macaques inoculated intravaginally, we detected viremia in 75 per cent of macaques and virus RNA in 100 per cent, followed by seroconversion. In macaques inoculated intrarectally, we detected viremia, virus RNA, or both, in 100 per cent of both species, followed by seroconversion. The magnitude and duration of infectious virus in blood of macaques suggest humans infected with Zika virus through sexual transmission will likely generate viremias sufficient to infect competent mosquito vectors. Our results indicate that transmission of Zika virus by sexual intercourse might serve as a virus maintenance mechanism in the absence of mosquito-to-human transmission and could increase the probability of establishment and spread of Zika virus in regions where this virus is not present. -- communicated by: ProMED-mail rapporteur Mary Marshall [These experiments provide additional support to the observations in humans that vaginal and rectal sexual intercourse engaged in by men who are infected with Zika virus can lead to transmission to susceptible partners. Moreover, the infected macaques develop viremias of sufficient magnitude to infect _Aedes aegypti_ vector mosquitoes. - Mod.TY] ****** [8] Vaccine trial difficulty Date: Fri 26 May 2017 Source: Nature News [edited] Studies of thousands of pregnant women that were set up to probe the link between Zika and birth defects may not provide definitive answers because of a sharp drop in the number of new cases, researchers have warned. The unexpected development is making the disease harder to study, and threatens to hamper trials of experimental vaccines that might protect pregnant women in future outbreaks. \"We're seeing few, if any, cases, particularly in southern Brazil, which we thought might be the next big area to be hit this year,\" says Oliver Brady, an epidemiologist at the London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine. The 2 largest studies each intend to recruit 10 000 or more pregnant women. The Zika in Infants and Pregnancy (ZIP) study was launched last June [2016] by the US National Institutes of Health (NIH) and the Funda\u00e7\u00e3o Oswaldo Cruz-Fiocruz (Fiocruz), a national scientific agency in Brazil, and has so far recruited almost 3000 women. The other study is just beginning to recruit. It is being carried out by the ZIKAlliance, a multidisciplinary consortium of 53 research centres that launched in December [2016] with EUR 12 million (USD 13.5 million) from the European Union. Both trials are taking place across multiple sites in South America and the Caribbean. But with the drop in new cases the ZIKAlliance is now reconsidering its plan. \"We are going to be pragmatic, we are going to try, but if there are not enough infected cases, then there is little point,\" says the consortium's scientific coordinator Xavier de Lamballerie, a virologist at Aix-Marseille University and French national biomedical agency INSERM. The ZIKAlliance intends to capture what cases it can at its sites, and is considering focusing resources in sites where Zika has been rarer, such as Bolivia, where future flare-ups might be more likely. \"We will track cases there where they are,\" he says, \"It's a race against the clock.\" The ZIP study is similarly faced with low numbers of Zika cases, says Anthony Fauci, director of the NIH's National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases (NIAID). \"That's good for the population -- if making it more difficult to get reasonable data for the study,\" he says. The low level of cases will also affect field trials of experimental vaccines, he adds. One such trial, the NIH VRC 705 phase II trial, began in March [2017] and aims to enrol at least 2490 volunteers in 7 countries in the Americas. Epidemiologists say that they are unsure why the number of cases of the mosquitoborne disease has declined so steeply, and whether it will spike again in some region in South America or elsewhere. Often, the disease causes no symptoms, so most cases go undetected; it's possible that the rapid spread of the disease in the Americas has meant it has burnt itself out because enough people have become immune to the virus. Large-scale trials inevitably take time to organize. But delays incurred in obtaining ethical and other approvals in the trials' host countries have slowed the process further, as have a lack of clear rules for matters such as the shipping and ownership of samples. [byline: Declan Butler] -- communicated by: ProMED-mail rapporteur Mary Marshall [This is a good news / bad news situation. The good news is that fewer individuals, and especially pregnant women, are becoming infected. The bad news is that after considerable effort and cost, there are now vaccines ready for clinical trials in the field, but with fewer cases, these trials will either take much longer to complete, or may even be abandoned. - Mod.TY] [ A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  .] [", "PRION DISEASE UPDATE: CREUTZFELDT-JAKOB DISEASE *********************************************** A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases In this update: [1] Sporadic Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease in plasma products [2] UK biannual update [3] Latest CJD figures ****** [1] Sporadic Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease in plasma products Date: Fri 12 May 2017 Source: Emerg Infect Dis. ref: Urwin P, Thanigaikumar K, Ironside JW, et al. Sporadic Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease in 2 plasma product recipients, United Kingdom. Emerg Infect Dis. 2017;23(6). doi: 10.3201/eid2306.161884. ------------------------------------------------------------------- Abstract -------- Sporadic Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease (sCJD) has not been previously reported in patients with clotting disorders treated with fractionated plasma products. We report 2 cases of sCJD identified in the United Kingdom in patients with a history of extended treatment for clotting disorders; 1 patient had hemophilia B and the other von Willebrand disease. Both patients had been informed previously that they were at increased risk for variant CJD because of past treatment with fractionated plasma products sourced in the United Kingdom. However, both cases had clinical and investigative features suggestive of sCJD. This diagnosis was confirmed in both cases on neuropathologic and biochemical analysis of the brain. A causal link between the treatment with plasma products and the development of sCJD has not been established, and the occurrence of these cases may simply reflect a chance event in the context of systematic surveillance for CJD in large populations. [The authors conclude \"This report describes 2 cases of sCJD in patients with a history of treatment with UK-sourced plasma products, 1 with a history of hemophilia B and 1 with von Willebrand's disease. To our knowledge, no previous case of sCJD in a person with a history of extended exposure to plasma products has been reported. It is clearly of concern that there have been 2 such cases in a relatively short period in the UK, where many plasma product recipients have been informed that they are at increased risk for vCJD. However, a causal link between the treatment with plasma products and the onset of sCJD has not been established, and the occurrence of these cases may simply reflect a chance event in the context of systematic surveillance of CJD in large populations.\" - Mod.UBA] -- communicated by: ProMED-mail ****** [2] UK biannual update Date: Fri 10 Feb 2017 Source: UK government Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease (CJD) biannual update [edited] This 6-monthly report provides an update on the enhanced surveillance of potential iatrogenic (healthcare-acquired) exposures to Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease (CJD). The data [are] correct as at [31 Dec 2013]. For numbers of CJD case reports, readers should consult data provided by the National CJD Research and Surveillance Unit (NCJDRSU). A briefing on a recently-identified human prion disease - variably protease-sensitive prionopathy - is also presented below; 1. Monitoring of patients 'at increased risk' of CJD ---------------------------------------------------- Individuals who have been identified as at increased risk of CJD as a consequence of their medical care are informed of their exposure and asked to follow public health precautions to avoid potentially transmitting the infection to others. They are also followed up to help determine the risks of CJD transmission to patients through different routes and to ascertain whether any people who may have been exposed to increased CJD risks go on to develop CJD. Public health follow-up activities include clinical monitoring, general practitioner (GP) updates, and post mortem investigations to determine whether asymptomatic individuals in these groups have been infected with the CJD agent. Some individuals also provide blood or tissue specimens for research purposes. A number of different organisations are involved in these activities: Public Health England (formerly the Health Protection Agency), Health Protection Scotland (HPS), UCL Institute of Child Health/Great Ormond Street Hospital (ICH), NHS Blood and Transplant (NHSBT), National CJD Research and Surveillance Unit (NCJDRSU), National Prion Clinic (NPC), and the UK Haemophilia Centre Doctors' Organisation (UKHCDO). The PHE CJD Section coordinates the collation of data on individuals identified as at increased risk of CJD, and who have been informed of this. These individuals are followed up through public health monitoring and research activities by different organisations (table 1). The PHE CJD Section currently holds data on the following groups of 'at risk' patients: - recipients of blood components from donors who subsequently developed vCJD; - blood donors to individuals who later developed vCJD; - other recipients of blood components from these blood donors; - recipients of certain plasma products between 1990 and 2001 (non-bleeding disorder patients); - certain surgical contacts of patients diagnosed with CJD; - highly transfused recipients. The data from the UKHCDO are likely to be an underestimate of the true number of 'at risk' patients with bleeding disorders who received UK-sourced clotting factors, as there was incomplete reporting of identified 'at risk' patients by haemophilia centres to the UKHCDO database. Notified 'at risk' patients are given the option of removing their details from the UKHCDO database, and are then removed from the 'at risk' totals. The data on 'at risk' patients who received human-derived human growth hormone held by the ICH is a slight underestimate of the total as a small number of these patients are not included in the ICH follow-up. Includes table on summary of all 'at risk' groups on which data are collected (as at [31 Dec 2013]). 2. Variably protease-sensitive prionopathy ------------------------------------------ Professor James W Ironside and Dr Mark W Head, The National CJD Research and Surveillance Unit, University of Edinburgh. Variably protease-sensitive prionopathy (VPSPr) is the most recently identified human prion disease, 1st described in the USA by Gambetti and colleagues in 2008 as \"a novel human disease with abnormal prion protein sensitive to protease\" [1]. Since then, similar cases have been identified in other countries; the National CJD Research and Surveillance Unit has identified 9 cases in the UK, 3 of which have been identified retrospectively and the others prospectively from samples and data collected since 1991 [2-6]. Other candidate cases are currently under investigation. Patients with VPSPr have no identified risk factors for acquired human prion disease and no associated mutations in the prion protein gene (PRNP) coding sequence have been found. In the original description a proportion of the patients had family histories of ill-defined dementia, but this has not been a feature in more recently identified cases [1,2,6]. VPSPr affects patients in the same age range as sporadic Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease (sCJD), occurring mostly in patients over the age of 60. The clinical features are more varied than in sCJD and include movement abnormalities, cognitive decline and unsteadiness while walking. The clinical illness is longer than for sCJD; most patients survive for over a year before succumbing to the illness. Diagnostic clinical criteria are therefore difficult to establish, and further work is required on this topic since this disease is likely to be under-ascertained [2,6]. Like sCJD, VPSPr occurs in all genetic groups defined by the polymorphism at codon 129 in the PRNP gene, ie MM, MV and MV. Unlike sCJD, there is a preponderance of the codon 129-V haplotype. VPSPr has distinctive neuropathological features, the most typical of which are microplaques that occur in a target-like arrangement and are particularly common in the cerebellum. These microplaques show differential staining with a panel of different anti-PrP antibodies, allowing a distinction from both the common sCJD VV2 and the rare sCJD VV1 subtypes [1,2,5,6]. The most distinctive and defining feature of VPSPr is the biochemistry of the abnormal prion protein in the brain, which is only poorly resistant to proteolytic digestion, yielding a low abundance, truncated 8kDa (approx) band in Western blot assays [1]. This fragment is often accompanied by a faint ladder of bands extending into the 18-30kDa range [1,2]. Some cases of VPSPr also show a sCJD-like pattern on Western blot analysis for abnormal prion protein, often in the cerebellum, suggesting molecular overlaps between VPSPr and sCJD [6,7]. Further work is required to fully establish the epidemiology, clinical and pathological diagnostic criteria and transmission characteristics of VPSPr. The Advisory Committee on Dangerous Pathogens Transmissible Spongiform Encephalopathy (ACDP TSE) Subgroup concluded that until further research can demonstrate how transmissible VPSPr may be, it would be advisable to add this novel form of human prion disease to the infection control guidance for CJD and other related disorders. [For references please visit the original URL. - CopyEd.AO] -- communicated by: ProMED-mail ****** [3] Latest CJD figures Date: 1990-2017 Source: The National CJD Research & Surveillance Unit (NCJDRSU)[edited] These figures show the number of suspect CJD cases referred to the NCJDRSU in Edinburgh, and the number of deaths of definite and probable cases in the UK from [1 Jan 1990]. Total referrals / Total Deaths: 3640 / 2284 Summary of vCJD cases Deaths ------ Deaths from definite vCJD (confirmed): 123 Deaths from probable vCJD (without neuropathological confirmation): 55 Deaths from probable vCJD (neuropathological confirmation pending): 0 Number of deaths from definite or probable vCJD (as above): 178 Alive ----- Number of definite/probable vCJD cases still alive: 0 Total number of definite or probable vCJD (dead and alive): 178 -- communicated by: ProMED-mail [Human prion diseases are a group of rare and fatal neurodegenerative diseases that include idiopathic (sporadic), genetic (inherited), and acquired (infectious) disorders. All are associated with the accumulation of an abnormal isoform of the prion protein (PrPSc) in the central nervous system. The commonest human prion disease is the sporadic form of Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease (sCJD), which occurs worldwide with a relatively uniform incidence of 1-2 cases per million population per year, a peak incidence in the 7th decade of life, and a median duration of illness of 4 months [Prusiner SB. Molecular biology of prion diseases. Science. 1991;252:1515-22.  ]. CJD (Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease) is a rare illness and is one of a group of diseases called prion diseases, which affect humans and animals. Prion diseases exist in different forms, all of which are progressive, currently untreatable and ultimately fatal. Their name arises because they are associated with an alteration in a naturally occurring protein: the prion protein. CJD was first described in 1920. A new form of CJD (variant CJD) linked to bovine spongiform encephalopathy (BSE) in cattle was identified in 1996. There are also genetic forms of human prion disease linked to mutations of the prion protein gene and cases caused by infection via medical or surgical treatments (iatrogenic CJD)  . - Mod.UBA] [", "LASSA FEVER - WEST AFRICA (18): NIGERIA *************************************** A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Fri 19 May 2017 Source: Nigeria Centre for Disease Control Weekly Epidemiological Report 7 (18) [edited] 1. Lassa fever Please note that the data reflect the routine reports -- that is, all suspected cases including the laboratory positive and negative cases. 1.1. Eleven suspected cases of Lassa fever were reported from 3 LGAs ([local government areas] (2 states) in week 18 of 2017 compared with 3 suspected cases from 3 LGAs (3 states) during the same period in 2016. 1.2. Laboratory results of the 11 suspected cases are pending (Edo - 10 and Taraba - 1). 1.3. Between weeks 1 and 18 (2017), 255 suspected Lassa fever cases with 58 laboratory confirmed cases and 46 deaths (case fatality rate [CFR] 18 per cent) from 51 LGAs (20 states) were reported compared with 657 suspected cases with 63 laboratory confirmed cases and 75 deaths (CFR 11.4 per cent) from 122 LGAs (27 states) during the same period in 2016 (figure 1). 1.4. Throughout 2016, 921 suspected Lassa fever cases with 109 laboratory confirmed cases and 119 deaths (CFR 12.9 per cent) from 144 LGAs (28 states and Federal Capital Territory [FCT]) were reported compared with 430 suspected cases with 25 laboratory confirmed cases and 40 deaths (CFR 9.3 per cent) from 37 LGAs (14 states and FCT) during the same period in 2015 (figure 2). 1.5. Investigation and active case search is ongoing in affected states with coordination of response activities by the Nigeria Centre for Disease Control [NCDC] with support from partners. 1.5.1. National Lassa Fever Working Group meetings and weekly National Surveillance and Outbreak Response meetings continue at NCDC to keep abreast of the current Lassa fever situation in the country. 1.5.2. Response materials for VHFs prepositioned across the country by NCDC at the beginning of the dry season. 1.5.3. New viral haemorrhagic fever [VHF] guidelines have been developed by the NCDC: interim national viral haemorrhagic fevers preparedness guidelines and standard operating procedures for Lassa fever management. 1.5.4. Ongoing reclassification of reported Lassa fever cases. 1.5.5. Ongoing review of the variables for case-based surveillance for VHF. 1.5.6. VHF case-based forms completed by affected states are being entered into the new VHF management system. This system allows for the creation of a VHF database for the country. 1.5.7. Confirmed cases are being treated at identified treatment/isolation centres across the states with Ribavirin and necessary supportive management also instituted. 1.5.8. Onsite support was earlier provided to Ogun, Nasarawa, Taraba, Ondo and Borno States by the NCDC and partners. 1.5.9. Offsite support provided by NCDC/partners in all affected states. 1.5.10. States are enjoined to intensify surveillance. Figure 1: Map of Nigeria showing areas affected by Lassa fever, week 1- 18, 2016 & 2017 and Figure 2: Map of Nigeria showing areas affected by Lassa fever, week 1 - 53, 2015 and week 1 - 52, 2016 are available at the source URL above. Table of cases by state, cumulative data weeks 1-18: State: Cases / Lab Confirmed / Deaths Adamawa: 6 / 0 / 2 Bauchi: 9 / 3 / 3 Cross River: 3 / 0 / 0 Ebonyi: 4 / 1 / 1 Edo: 91 / 20 / 9 Enugu: 1 / 1 / 1 FCT: 2 / 0 / 0 Gombe: 15 / 0 / 1 Jigawa: 1 / 0 / 0 Kadun: 1 / 0 / 0 Kano: 23 / 2 / 10 Kebbi: 1 / 0 / 0 Kogi: 2 / 1 / 1 Nasarawa: 26 / 6 / 2 Ogun: 8 / 1 / 0 Ondo: 13 / 6 / 2 Plateau: 5 / 4 / 3 Rivers: 6 / 1 / 0 Taraba: 37 / 12 / 9 Yobe: 1 / 0 / 0 Total: 255 / 58 / 46 -- communicated by: Olutayo Olajide Babalobi Lecturer and Consultant Epizootiologist (One Health, Participatory Epizootiology and Veterinary ICT Research Group) Department of Veterinary Public Health and Preventive Medicine Faculty of Veterinary Medicine University of Ibadan Ibadan Nigeria [Dr Olutayo Olajide Babalobi is thanked for sending in this report. Cases of Lassa fever are continuing to occur in Nigeria. As noted in earlier comments, Lassa fever remains a problem in Nigeria because the virus is endemic there. Virus transmission to humans occur when people are in contact with the reservoir rodent host, the multimammate mouse (in the genus _Mastomys_) or their excreta. Transmission also occurs in health facilities when personal protection equipment is not employed and barrier nursing practices are not adequate to protect staff from blood and secretions of infected patients. Also, as noted in earlier posts, prevention and control of Lassa fever in nature depends on control of the rodent reservoir, which occurs across Nigeria and beyond. Reduction of populations of this rodent will require active participation at the village level. That will necessitate mounting a public education program with support of rodent control technicians. Preventing entry of rodents into the home and keeping food materials tightly covered are helpful measures to prevent infection. Elimination of these rodents completely is probably not possible. Images of _Mastomys_ mice can be seen at  . Maps of Nigeria can be accessed at  and  . - Mod.TY A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  .] [", "FOODBORNE ILLNESS - URUGUAY: (MONTEVIDEO) REQUEST FOR INFORMATION ***************************************************************** A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Fri 26 May 2017 15:01 hs Source: Radio Monte Carlo [machine transl, edited] The Ministry of Public Health (MSP) has confirmed that they are investigating 2 outbreaks of food poisoning that have affected more than 100 people in recent days. Sources report they analyzed the germ and the bacteria that were in the foods consumed. One of the cases occurred in a family setting and affected 10 people -- one of them is in a serious condition. The other outbreak affected more than 100 people who attended a social event. The cause of this intoxication is being investigated and at present it is not possible to say what food is responsible. Social media networks are circulating a message linked to an outbreak of salmonellosis that affected a family; but the MSP has not confirmed the etiology of the food poisoning outbreaks that affected the family or the social event described above. [byline: Luis Armando] -- communicated by: ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts [The etiology or etiologies of these outbreaks have not been stated officially but salmonellosis has been inferred on social media at least for one of the clusters. - Mod.LL A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  .] [", "CHOLERA, DIARRHEA AND DYSENTERY UPDATE (39): ASIA (YEMEN) ********************************************************* A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Mon 29 May 2017 9:16am EDT Source: Reuters [edited] The number of people who have died in a cholera epidemic affecting Yemen has risen to at least 471, according to World Health Organization (WHO) figures released on [Mon 29 May 2017]. But the latest WHO bulletin covering the period from [Thu 27 April 2017], said that there was a \"significant decrease\" in the daily average number of cases recorded in the week up to [Sat 27 May 2017] compared to the previous 7-day period. The epidemic began in October 2016 and grew until December 2016. It then dwindled but was never brought fully under control, and a new surge in cases began in April 2017. Yemen has been hit hard by civil war, with 19 million of its 28 million people needing humanitarian aid and many of them on the brink of famine. Fewer than half of the country's health facilities are fully functional. WHO said on [Mon 29 May 2017] that the average daily number of cases recorded between 21 and 27 May was 2529 -- down from 3025 in the previous 7 days. The bulletin said that the total number of suspected cases stood at 51 832. Caused by ingesting bacteria from water or food contaminated with feces, cholera usually manifests itself with sudden acute diarrhea and can kill within hours, although three quarters of infected people show no symptoms. The short incubation period means outbreaks can spread with speed, especially in places without safe water and proper sanitation, according to WHO. [byline: Tom Miles and Sami Aboudi] -- communicated by: ProMED-mail [The statistics as shown below document the epidemic, hopefully the number of cases recorded each day will decline: Date (2017) / Cases / Deaths 8 May / 1360 / 25 11 May / 2752 / 51 13 May / 8595 / 115 14 May / 11 000 / 180 17 May / 17 200 / 209 19 May / 23 500 / 242 21 May / 29 300 / 315 22 May / 35 217 / 361 24 May / 42 207 / 420 27 May / 51 832 / 471. - Mod.LL A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  .] [", "HEPATITIS - IRAQ (02): (AL-ANBAR) REQUEST FOR INFORMATION ********************************************************* A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Sun 28 May 2017 Source: Yaqein News Agency [in Arabic, trans. Mod.NS, edited] Viral hepatitis has spread in Al-Saqlawiyah city (8 km or 5 miles north west of Fallujah) in Al-Anbar governorate, amid shortages of medicines and lack of health care services. The correspondent of Yaqein News Agency said that \"more than 15 cases of viral hepatitis have been recorded in Al-Saqlawiyah, Al-Anbar governorate. He indicated that the health centers lack medical supplies and vaccines to prevent the disease. The correspondent added that \"the viral hepatitis cases have been diagnosed in the areas of the center of Al-Saqlawiyah, Bakkash, and Zaghart.\" He added that \"viral hepatitis is contagious, and there is no movement from the local government in Al-Saqlawiyah towards the concerned authorities in order to control the situation before the occurrence of a disaster.\" -- communicated by: ProMED-MENA [Both hepatitis A and E viruses are waterborne and can occur in outbreaks. In areas of poor public health infrastructure where waterborne infections are common if outbreaks of viral hepatitis occur in adults, it is likely that the culprit is the hepatitis E virus. This is the case since, in many countries; the seroprevalence rate of hepatitis A is close to 100 per cent by the age of 10. The following is part of a UN Eastern Mediterranean Regional Office ( ) report on viral hepatitis in Iraq: \"In Iraq, the number of hepatitis A cases has increased from 1802 in 2009 to 4473 in 2014 among nationals. The country is a low endemicity country for hepatitis B and C. The usual mode of transmission is blood transfusions or repeated exposure to blood and its derivatives (post-transfusion non-A non-B hepatitis). \"For hepatitis B, 3674 cases were reported; hepatitis C 929 cases were reported and 199 cases were reported for hepatitis E. This was due to expansion of diagnosis in district labs. In the past, diagnosis was in public health laboratory in governorates. However, since 2013 diagnosis is conducted in district laboratories. Each district has an ELISA machine for hepatitis diagnostics. The major challenge for the program is availability of funds, security situation in the country, overcrowding in the areas of migrants and refugees. The program also suffers from lack of training and capacity-building and lack of availability of diagnostic kits. \"The transmission of hepatitis type A and E is facilitated by poor infrastructure, poor quality of potable water, unsafe food and poor hygiene. A majority of health workers do not follow medical guidelines in dealing with blood and its derivatives, which has led to the spread of hepatitis B and C in communities. The priorities of the Ministry of Health are to establish an efficient hepatitis surveillance system, build the capacity of health personnel to manage patients, and provide medicines and diagnostic services at governorate level.\" Al Anbar Governorate, or Anbar Province, is the largest governorate in Iraq by area. Encompassing much of the country's western territory, it shares borders with Syria, Jordan, and Saudi Arabia. The provincial capital is Ramadi; other important cities include Fallujah and Haditha. The name of the governorate in Persian language means \"warehouse\" or \"silo\", from the verb, anb\u00e2shtan (to store, to warehouse). This was the last stop/warehouses on the old Silk Road toward Syria. The governorate can be found on a map at  . - Mod.LL A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  .] [", "SALMONELLOSIS - IRELAND: (DUBLIN) CATERER, POULTRY ************************************************** A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Tue 30 May 2017 10:34 Source: Raidi\u00f3 Teilif\u00eds \u00c9ireann (RTE) [edited] The assistant national director for public health with the Health Service Executive has said an outbreak of salmonellosis in north Dublin has been isolated to a single producer, who was providing food for a number of parties on the weekend of 13 May 2017. Dr Kevin Kelleher said this is probably the largest outbreak of salmonellosis in Ireland in the past 10 years and the cause of the problem is believed to have been poultry. Speaking on RT\u00c9's Morning Ireland, he said: \"We, on average, get somewhere between 200 and 500 cases of salmonellosis a year over the last decade. This is probably the largest outbreak we've had in that period of time, but then you can understand why that is, because there's been a single event, clearly on that weekend, but there were a large amount of groups involved. As far as we can ascertain, it's poultry.\" The Food Safety Authority has named the producer as Flanreil Food Services in O'Dwyer's Pub in Portmarnock. Dr Kelleher said around 50 people were affected. Some were admitted to hospital, but have since been discharged. He said that people need to be scrupulous about cleanliness and warned people to be careful that food, in particular mince and poultry, is cooked correctly. -- communicated by: ProMED-mail rapporteur George A Robertson [By its very nature, a catering service can be the source of a multifocal outbreak of foodborne disease. Poultry is thought to be the initial source, which could be related to undercooking or issues with kitchen hygiene. - Mod.LL A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  .] [", "WHITE NOSE SYNDROME, BATS - NORTH AMERICA (06): (NORTH CAROLINA) SURVEYS ************************************************************************ A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Fri 26 May 2017 Source: North Carolina Wildlife Resources Commision [edited] White nose syndrome [WNS], a fungal disease that has killed millions of bats in the eastern United States since it was 1st detected in 2006, continues its deadly spread in North Carolina. During winter bat surveys in January and February [2017], biologists with the NC Wildlife Resources Commission and NC State Parks, documented the 1st case of WNS in Stokes County, which marks the farthest east record of WNS in North Carolina and the 1st record of visible WNS in the Piedmont. Historically, biologists had conducted most bat surveys in the western part of the state because that is where the most bat hibernacula (caves and mines) are found. However, this winter, biologists expanded the survey range to include hibernacula across the state. In the Stokes County hibernaculum, they found 4 tricolored bats with visible signs of WNS -- a whitish, fuzzy fungus growing on their noses, wings and ears. The only other documentation of WNS outside of the mountains in North Carolina was a site in Stanly County that tested positive for the WNS fungus in 2015. However, during subsequent surveys in 2016 and 2017, biologists found no bats exhibiting the telltale signs of WNS. Just to be certain the Stanly County site was WNS free, they took swabs from bats this year [2017] and submitted them for testing. Results, which came back this week [week of Sun 21 may 2017], indicate WNS was present only in the bats from Stokes County. While the results provided a bit of good news in an otherwise bleak situation, biologists continued to see low numbers of bats in all the caves and mines they surveyed in western North Carolina, indicating that the large declines in bat populations have already occurred, according to mammalogist Katherine Caldwell. \"What we're seeing now at these sites is WNS' devastating aftermath,\" Caldwell said. \"Most sites we surveyed in western North Carolina had over 90 per cent declines in bat populations from their pre-WNS counts, with some declines as high as 99 per cent.\" While the steep declines of bat populations in western North Carolina are dismaying, the surveys did reveal a bit of good news: bats in the Piedmont and Coastal Plain were faring better than their western counterparts. \"While we don't have as much data on sites in the Piedmont and Coastal Plain, we did document the highest number of bats at 2 of the sites that we have been monitoring for the past 4 years,\" Caldwell said. \"Even better, we found a cave in Onslow County that had 8 hibernating tri-colored bats, all of which appeared to be WNS free. Caves are relatively unknown in the Coastal Plain so it was real treat to be able to survey this cave.\" Biologists 1st detected WNS in North Carolina in February 2011, in a bat from Avery County. Since that time, the disease has been found in 10 counties in western North Carolina, though WNS is likely present throughout the mountains based on bat decline data. WNS has been found in 8 bat species, but the largest population declines have occurred in 4 species -- northern long-eared, little brown, tricolored, and Indiana bat. The other 4 species affected by WNS are big brown, gray, eastern small-footed, and southeastern bat. Why some bat species are hit harder by WNS than others is still a mystery to biologists, but several hypotheses are currently being tested. \"We know that this fungus only grows in a narrow temperature range, between 41-56 degrees Fahrenheit [5-13 degrees Celsius], in high-humidity conditions like those of a cave/mine so only cave hibernators are at risk,\" Caldwell said. \"But some species that hibernate in caves are not affected even though they hibernate in caves where other species have the disease. As the disease continues to spread west across the continent, other species could be affected. We really just don't know at this point.\" Neither the disease nor the fungus that causes it has been detected in any of the so-called tree roosting bats, which typically roost individually in or on trees in the warmer months and either migrate south for the winter or remain in the area, hibernating individually outside of caves. The disease has not been detected in the 2 species of big-eared bats that occur in North Carolina, including the federally endangered Virginia big-eared bat. While WNS has a deadly effect on bats, it does not affect people -- at least not directly. Indirectly, however, it can have a huge impact on humans by reducing the number of bats in North American ecosystems. \"Bats in these ecosystems are insectivorous and may consume their body weight in insects in a single night,\" Caldwell said. \"Many insects eaten by bats are crop and forest pests.\" The US Geological Service estimates that loss of bats in North America could lead to agricultural losses exceeding USD 3.7 billion annually. Biologists will continue their long-term monitoring efforts of bats in North Carolina, concentrating their efforts on caves and mines in the Piedmont and Coastal Plain. But first they need to find hibernacula to survey -- a task that is easier said than done, according to Caldwell. [byline: Jodie Owen] -- communicated by: ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts [The geographical distribution of WNS as of 9 May 2017 can be seen at  . - Mod.PMB A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  .] [", "RABIES (22): AMERICAS (USA) *************************** A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases In this report: [1] Virginia - human case of rabies [2] Illinois - bat, human exposure [3] New Hampshire - fox, human exposure [4] Indianapolis - bat, human exposure [5] North Carolina - fox, human and pet deaths [6] Arizona - fox, human exposure [7] Michigan - raccoon, human and canine exposure [8] New Jersey - ovine, human exposure [9] South Carolina - skunk, fox, human exposure [10] New York - fox, human and domestic animal exposure [11] Colorado - warning, rabies on the rise - 48 positives in 5 months [12] Missouri - bat, human exposure [13] Kentucky - canine, human exposure presumed [1] Virginia - Human case of rabies Date: Fri 12 May 2017, 12:01 PM EDT Source: NBC 29 [edited] The Virginia Department of Health (VDH) is investigating a rare case of human rabies in central Virginia. VDH public health veterinarian Julia Murphy says the victim was bitten by a dog in India, but didn't seek any treatment until returning home to the commonwealth (of Virginia) in April [2017]. Murphy says the patient did not get a rabies vaccine, and was diagnosed 5 days ago [Sun 7 May 2017]. Rabies, if left untreated for too long, is most often fatal. \"In this case, this patient's incubation period was roughly 6 weeks, which is not unusual for rabies in people,\" said Murphy. Dr Daniel Sawyer, an infectious disease specialist, said during the 6 week incubation period the patient was most likely not contagious. Sawyer is not involved with treating this patient. \"Coughing is an infrequent way to transmit the disease. So you'd really have to be sick with their bodily fluids - usually saliva - and that sort of thing,\" said Sawyer. VDH is working with the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention [CDC], as well as the hospital where the patient is being treated. The department is assessing every person who might have come into contact with the patient and is working closely with their family. Officials are also evaluating all health providers who are treating the patient for any signs of the virus. Due to policy, officials cannot confirm where the patient is being treated. However, multiple sources have indicated to NBC29 that the patient is being treated at the University of Virginia (UVA) Medical Center. NBC29 asked the UVA Medical Center to confirm this, but it would neither confirm nor deny the information. [The UVA should not be providing information on any patient and especially one as potentially high profile as a rabies victim. This would violate the privacy regulations. UVA was correct in their response. - Mod.TG] Dr Sawyer says it is uncommon for a person in the US to have rabies: \"There are 1 or 2 or 3 cases per year in this country. So it's pretty rare.\" The last known case of human rabies in Virginia was back in 2009. The patient in that case was also bit by a dog in India. He died less than a month later. NBC29 has not confirmed the condition of the patient at this point, however most people who contract rabies and do not have a vaccine die within a few weeks. VDH says the only known human to human transmission cases of rabies have been through organ transplants. VDH is working with CDC and healthcare centers where the patient sought care, to assess any healthcare worker who potentially may have been exposed to rabies virus due to contact with this patient. VDH is also working to identify any family members and close contacts that may have been exposed to rabies virus due to contact with this patient. According to the VDH, no additional information about the individual will be released to protect their privacy. Our thoughts are with the patient and the patient's family. Human rabies cases in the United States are rare, with only 1 to 3 cases reported annually. As many as 28 cases of human rabies have been diagnosed in the United States since 2006, of which 8 cases were infected outside the US and its territories. The last time VDH reported a human rabies case was in 2009. This patient had also traveled to India and was bitten by a dog while there. Those traveling internationally should check with their healthcare providers about vaccinations or other health precautions that are recommended prior to departure. A comprehensive resource for travel health recommendations, for healthcare providers and travelers, is available at . -- communicated by: ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts ****** [2] Illinois - Bat, human exposure Date: Fri 28 Apr 2017 Source: NBC Chicago [edited] A total of 5 children who were seen playing with a rabid bat have been identified and referred to the Cook County Health Department for follow up. Earlier this week [week 24 to 30 Apr 2017] 5 young girls were spotted playing with what turned out to be a live bat that tested positive for rabies in Lagrange Park. While it's not known if the girls actually touched the animal -- identifying them and getting them checked out became critical for health officials. Health officials say coming in contact with the saliva of the bats can be extremely dangerous and even deadly. Rabies is a virus that affects the central nervous system. You can contract it from a bite, scratch or even saliva from an infected animal. If untreated, rabies can be fatal. In Lagrange Park, health officials offered a warning that has some parents on alert. \"Bats have really tiny jaws and it's not always obvious when someone has been bitten,\" says Demian Christiansen of the Cook County Department of Public Health. \"Since rabies is fatal, we really don't want to take any chances.\" The girls have all been located and referred to the health department. It's unclear if they were exposed to rabies. \"I'm glad the health department stepped in and hopefully nothing bad will come out of it,\" said parent S. She faced a similar situation when one of her daughters found a dead rabbit and brought it to school. We had to go to the doctor,\" she recalled. \"We went through a little ordeal -- because it's scary.\" Health officials say you should not handle bats whether they are dead or alive. If you see a bat, call your area's animal control, officials say. [byline: Regina Waldroup] -- communicated by: ProMED-mail ****** [3] New Hampshire - fox, human exposure Date: Thu 4 May 2017, 7:57 PM Source: Bennington Banner [edited] The gray fox that attacked 2 Londonderry residents on [Sat 29 Apr 2017] has tested positive for rabies. The fox had been sighted multiple times across Londonderry, and the animal's suspicious behavior led local officials to suspect that it had been rabid. \"We had 2 unprovoked attacks by a fox on humans and they both happened on the same day,\" said Kevin Beattie, Londonderry's emergency management director. \"They were both in the same fairly small area, so we were pretty sure it was the same fox that did both attacks.\" BC was the fox's 1st victim, taken by surprise outside of her mother's house in Londonderry. \"It came out of nowhere. I never saw it until it was on me. I was able to turn quickly to get it off me, but it jumped on me again and bit me on the knee,\" said BC. As the bite had broken her skin, BC rushed to the emergency room for a series of rabies shots. \"It did act strangely,\" said BC. \"Had I known, or had I seen it, I would have run for the house.\" Soon after, Londonderry's game warden David Taddei pulled into BP's residence to warn him of the attack. About an hour later, while BP and his family were playing wiffle ball in their yard, the fox struck again. \"I just happened to be about 10 or 15 feet [3-5 metres] from my 5 year old and saw it running toward him,\" said BP. \"It nipped at the right side of his belly, and I just reacted and was able to kick the fox off of him.\" \"The minute I saw it I knew it was the same fox, and it wasn't getting out of there alive,\" said BP. \"There was a shovel nearby, so when the fox began to crawl out from under the playset I hit it and it just dropped.\" The game warden immediately had the animal tested for rabies, and on [Tue 2 May 2017] those results came back positive. \"This type of aggressive unprovoked attack is rather unusual even for rabid animals,\" said Beattie. \"We haven't seen any more animals acting strangely since then, or had another incident fortunately.\" Immediately following Saturday's attacks Beattie put out a public notice on Londonderry's community forum on Facebook, as well as to his email list of about 600 residents. Following Tuesday's positive test results, officials sent out a 2nd notice. \"The chances of another rabies infected animal in the area are hard to predict but definitely possible,\" read the notice from the State Veterinarian and the Game Warden. \"Be observant and watch for wild animals that may be acting unusual.\" While such aggressive attacks are uncommon, sightings of rabid animals are not. So far there have been 2 reported cases of rabid animals this year [2017] in Bennington County, both in Manchester. In 2016 there were 10 confirmed cases of rabid animals in Bennington County, though more unconfirmed cases are likely. \"I think it's very traumatic that the 5 year old did get attacked, but at the end of the day the outcome was good,\" said BP. \"We were able to get the fox so it couldn't hurt anyone else.\" Both victims of Saturdays attack are receiving treatment, and are expected to make a full recovery. [byline: Cherise Madigan] -- communicated by: ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts ****** [4] Indianapolis - bat, human exposure Date: Tue 9 May 2017, 11:11 AM Source: WNDU [edited] Beware of bats: that was the warning sounded [Tue 2 May 2017] by the St Joseph County Humane Society after a bat tested positive for rabies. That bat bit a human being. St Joseph County hasn't had a rabies test on a bat come back positive since 2014. Late last week [week 1 to 7 May 2017] at a home in southern St Joseph County, an adult female encountered a bat in her bedroom. \"In this particular case the bat was in a bedroom and you know, the person, from my understanding was getting ready for bed. The bat was in the room and she got bit,\" said Humane Society director Genny Carlson. \"There was a clear indication that she was bit but some cases with bats you might not know that you actually got bit because their teeth are so razor sharp.\" Carlson says the woman in question sought immediate treatment for rabies and is expected to be okay. In 2006, a 10 year old Marshall County girl died after being bitten by a bat. \"If you are exposed to rabies and you don't get immediate treatment, maybe you don't even know that you were exposed directly, and 3 or 4 months go by and you start showing symptoms, it's very possible that you could die from that illness,\" said Carlson. Carlson says the situation also serves as a reminder that the law requires any dog, cat, and ferret over the age of 12 weeks to have a rabies vaccination. St Joseph County officials revealed [on Tue 2 May 2017] that a resident was recently bitten by a rabid bat. \"While the diagnosis indicates the presence of the disease in the area, all Hoosiers should take a few common sense precautions every day to protect their families and pets against the disease, regardless of where they live,\" the Humane Society of St Joseph County advised in a media release. St Joseph County residents should not be alarmed at the recent local discovery of a rabid bat in the region. While the diagnosis indicates the presence of the disease in the area, all Hoosiers should take a few common sense precautions every day to protect their families and pets against the disease, regardless of where they live. Rabies is a viral disease spread primarily through the bite of an infected animal. Dr Sandra Norman, a veterinarian with the Indiana State Board of Animal Health, recommends the following guidelines to reduce the risk of rabies exposure to people and animals: - avoid contact with wild animals (not just bats) at all times. Do not feed or handle wild animals, and secure any trash and pet food in animal-proof containers. Cover attic and chimney openings and other entry points in the home, which may invite unwanted visitors. - wild animals are generally active at night and avoid contact with people. Daytime contact with humans is unusual, and should be viewed suspiciously. - Indiana law requires all dogs, cats and ferrets 3 months of age or older be vaccinated against rabies by a licensed, accredited veterinarian. Pets should be kept close to home, as free-roaming animals are at higher risk of exposure to the disease. - if your pet is bitten or attacked by a wild animal, contact your veterinarian and local animal control. Your pet will need a booster if the animal is determined to be rabid. - if you or someone in your family is bitten or scratched by a wild or stray animal or a pet, attempt to confine or kill the animal or determine the owner of the pet (if this can be done without risk of further injury). Wear leather or latex gloves when handling all animals with possible exposure (dead or alive). - immediately wash the wound thoroughly with soap and water. Call your physician at once to determine treatment and make sure the bite is reported to the local department of health and animal control. For more information about rabies prevention and safety, visit the Indiana State Board of Animal Health online at . -- communicated by: ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts ****** [5] North Carolina - fox, human and pet deaths Date: Mon 8 May 2017, 7:51 PM Source: WITN [edited] Authorities now confirm a fox that attacked 2 people last week [week of 1 to 7 May 2017] in Craven County was rabid. Scott Harrelson, director of the Craven County Health Department, says that a man on Tuscarora Rhems Road was working [on Fri 5 May 2017] night outside his home when the fox ran out of the woods and attacked the man's pet duck and chicken, killing both of them. Harrelson says the fox then turned and attacked the man, biting him twice on the legs. It then ran up on the porch of the home and attacked a woman, who was sitting outside. Harrelson says that thankfully a neighbor came to their rescue and beat the fox with a rake. The fox was sent to the state lab for rabies testing. If it is rabid the 2 victims will have to undergo a series of shots to protect themselves from the deadly virus. [Given the way the fox attacked without warning, it should be presumed the animal has rabies, and post exposure prophylaxis should begin. - Mod.TG] The test came back positive for rabies, according to the health department. The 2 victims now have to undergo a series of shots to protect themselves from the deadly virus. While this particular couple may not have been able to avoid the fox, the health department says what happened can serve as a strong reminder for others of the importance of staying away from rabid animals if possible, and to call authorities if you spot any animal acting strangely or out of the ordinary. Officials also say this encounter should remind pet owners to keep their animals up to date on their rabies vaccines. [byline: Dave Jordan and Stacia Strong] -- communicated by: ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts ****** [6] Arizona - fox, human exposure Date: Wed 17 May 2017 Source: Arizona Game and Fish Department (AZGFD) [edited] Rose Canyon Lake campground on Mount Lemmon is temporarily closed pending a search by state and federal wildlife officials for a potentially rabid fox that bit a 12 year old Tucson boy's knee at 5 pm on [Sun 14 May 2017]. The boy was treated for his wound and rabies [likely this is post exposure prophylaxis against rabies and is a series of injections. - Mod.TG] at Tucson Medical Center, and released. The fox ran off after biting the boy, who was playing with his dog at the time of the attack. The fox is assumed to still be in the area since they have relatively small territories. The Arizona Game and Fish Department (AZGFD) recommended the campground closure to the Coronado National Forest on [Mon 15 May 2017], when they helped clear campers from the area and searched for the fox unsuccessfully using wildlife calls. The temporary closure is expected to be short-term while wildlife officials further assess the situation. Rose Canyon Lake is stocked by AZGFD with fish and is popular with anglers. Clearly ill, dying or dead foxes have been recovered for rabies testing 3 times since March [2017], from the Sweetwater Drive, Picture Rocks, and Sabino Canyon areas. \"Avoid contact with and don't approach wildlife behaving abnormally or appears to be ill. If you believe that you see a rabid animal, call us at 1-623-236-7201 or the Pima County Health Department at 520-724-7797 immediately,\" said regional supervisor Raul Vega of Game and Fish in Tucson. \"In addition, avoid touching any dead wildlife that you may find, and keep your pets away from them as well.\" Vega added that pets such as dogs and cats, as well as livestock like horses, should be regularly vaccinated for rabies. In addition, dogs should be on leashes when outdoors, and a veterinarian consulted if any domestic animals are injured by wildlife, he said. Unvaccinated animals exposed to wildlife with rabies must undergo a 4 month quarantine. [Most states indicate if the bite was known to be from a rabid animal, then the unvaccinated pet is euthanized. Each state has some slightly different regulations regarding a pet exposure and quarantine. - Mod.TG] Rabies is a preventable viral disease most often transmitted through the bite of a rabid animal. The rabies virus attacks the central nervous system, causing encephalitis (swelling of the brain). It is almost always fatal once symptoms appear. Rabies can be prevented in persons who have come into contact or have been bitten by wild animals through prompt administration of anti-rabies vaccine and rabies immune globulin [post exposure prophylaxis]. The principal rabies hosts in Arizona are bats, skunks, and foxes. These animals carry their own distinct rabies virus variants or \"strains.\" When rabies within these animal groups increases, rabies can \"spill over\" into other mammal species, such as bobcats, coyotes, javelina, cats, dogs, horses, cows, etc. Rabid animals may appear disoriented or intoxicated, salivate heavily or appear thirsty. About 15 people are exposed to rabid animals in Arizona each year. People who are exposed must receive post exposure prophylaxis [vaccine and anti-rabies serum treatment] to prevent infection. Prevention information is available at  . -- communicated by: ProMED-mail ****** [7] Michigan - raccoon, human and canine exposure Date: Thu 18 May 2017 Source: CBS 6 Albany [edited] CF credits his dog M for protecting his family from the raccoon that's forced him to seek medical attention. \"It bit her, scratched her a couple of times, and she kept trying to defend the house,\" CF said. M spotted the raccoon in the backyard last week, near where the children were playing. \"It started making sounds at the kids,\" CF said. We're told Animal Control was able to catch it and put it down, but later the raccoon tested positive for rabies. Because CF had come in contact with M's saliva, he also had to be treated for possible rabies contamination. The illness is spread through saliva and can be deadly for both animals and humans. Animal control officer Kevin McDonough is warning Troy residents about this case, and 3 other recent cases involving raccoons acting aggressively. \"There's no cure for rabies; all you can do is go through the series of shots and hope you don't get it,\" McDonough said. [Post exposure prophylaxis regarding rabies is generally very effective. However, it must be administered within a narrow window of time from the time of exposure. - Mod.TG] McDonough says the latest call involving an aggressive raccoon happened [on Thu 11 May 2017] morning on Peterson Court. [Wed 10 May 2017] night, McDonough had a bad encounter with 1 himself, after he was called to a home on Crestwood Avenue. \"The animal attacked me numerous times, and the animal had to be euthanized,\" McDonough said. McDonough wasn't injured and nearby residents are relieved the raccoon was caught. CF still has to go through 2 more rounds of shots to protect him against rabies, but right now he says he's just worried about his dog.\"I just don't want my dog to die, that's all,\" CF said. He's hoping his story will prevent another case. [byline: Anne McCloy] -- communicated by: ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts ****** [8] New Jersey - ovine, human exposure Date: Mon 22 May 2017 Source: NJ Today [edited] The Cumberland County positive officials are investigating a rabies case that involved a lamb located at a farm in Greenwich Township. On [Tue 25 Apr 2017], the owners of the farm bought 3 lambs at an auction in Salem County that were brought there to sell from a farm in Gloucester County. One of the lambs died within a day, and was not tested for any diseases. [If it was in the same group, perhaps it should have been tested for rabies. - Mod.TG] The male lamb that was confirmed rabid began showing clinical signs of rabies on [Wed 3 May 2017] and was euthanized on [Sun 7 May 2017]. The health department received positive lab results on [Wed 17 May 2017]. It is not known at this time how the lamb became infected with the rabies virus. The health department conducted an exposure investigation and interviewed 5 people who may have been in contact with the rabid lamb. To date, 4 of the 5 persons in contact are receiving post-exposure treatment. The New Jersey Department of Agriculture (NJDA) is also involved and has completed an assessment and quarantine of the farm animals. The 3rd lamb that was purchased is in quarantine which is being overseen by the NJDA. The Cumberland health department is obtaining a contact list for the 3rd lamb in case it begins to exhibit signs of rabies and the Salem County Health Department was notified upon receipt of the information that lambs were purchased from the auction. [Hopefully the Salem County Health Department is looking into who at the auction may have had contact with the particular lot of lambs as these people may need treatment. - Mod.TG] The Gloucester County Health Department was also notified because the lambs originated from a farm there. [Hopefully the Gloucester County Health Department is speaking to the original owners of the lamb and determining if there is further exposure in the flock or if the owners need treatment. - Mod.TG] Rabies is a preventable but fatal disease that is usually found in wild raccoons, skunks and foxes. Cats and dogs also can become infected with rabies. Animals that are aggressive, appear disoriented, or more friendly than usual with humans or domestic animals may be infected with rabies. Being bitten by a rabid wild animal is the commonest way for any human, pet or domestic animal to get infected with rabies; contact with animal saliva is also a risk for rabies infection. Residents are urged to check their dog and cat vaccination records and have their pets vaccinated for rabies before the current duration of immunity expires. \"We are asking anyone who may have come into contact with 1 of the lambs involved to please contact the Cumberland County Department of Health,\" said health officer Megan Sheppard. \"The news of another positive rabies case in Cumberland County is an appropriate time to remind residents of the importance of rabies vaccination in order to keep their pets safe and healthy,\" said Sheppard. The Cumberland County Department of Health, along with other agencies, will continue to monitor the situation closely. -- communicated by: ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts ****** [9] South Carolina - skunk, fox, human exposure Date: Tue 23 May 2017 Source: The State [edited] One person in Newberry County and 2 in Kershaw County have started treatment for rabies after being exposed in 2 separate incidents involving wild animals testing positive for rabies, DHEC said in a statement on [Tue 23 May 2017]. One person was potentially infected by a skunk on [Tue 16 May 2017] in Newberry County. Health officials said the exposure occurred when the infected skunk fought with 2 dogs. Both dogs have been quarantined for 6 months, the time required when an animal is not up-to-date with rabies vaccinations, health officials said. [Likely the animal was revaccinated then placed into quarantine. Regulations regarding rabies quarantine may differ slightly from state to state. - Mod.TG] On [Sat 20 May 2017] 2 people in Kershaw County were attacked by an infected fox east of Camden. A dog was also exposed and was quarantined for 45 days. The shorter quarantine period, compared to that required in the Newberry County attack, was set because this pet had an up-to-date rabies vaccination. As of [Sun 30 April 2017], 21 animals had tested positive for rabies in South Carolina. Treatment for someone who may have been exposed after being bitten or scratched by an animal that could have rabies consists of a series of shots over a 14-day period. The shots are usually given in the upper arm. [byline: Rachael Myers Lowe] -- communicated by: ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts ****** [10] New York - fox, human and domestic animal exposure Date: Wed 24 May 2017 Source: Times Journal Online [edited] A grey fox found in the Town of Richmondville, NY has tested positive for rabies. The fox was sent to Wadsworth Laboratory for testing and the positive test results were received by the Schoharie County Department of Health last [Mon 15 May 2017]. Several domestic animals and 2 humans were exposed to the fox. The animals were up-to-date with their rabies vaccinations and have received rabies booster shots; the county Department of Health is coordinating the response. Once infected, rabies is a virus that has a 100 per cent fatality rate in mammals, including humans, when left untreated. The following precautions from the Department of Health will help protect family and pets from rabies: - vaccinate pets: New York State law requires that all dogs, cats and ferrets be vaccinated against rabies by four months of age. - vaccination is also recommended for livestock with frequent human contact. - report any sick or strange acting wildlife. - do not feed wildlife or stray animals and discourage them from seeking food near your home. - do not approach an unknown animal, either wild or domestic, especially if it is acting in a strange or unusual manner. - report all animal bites and any contact with bats to the Health Department in your county. Human rabies can be prevented after exposure by administering a series of shots. - keep garbage cans tightly covered and avoid storing any food outside. - children should be instructed to tell an adult immediately if they were bitten or scratched by any animal. - if an unvaccinated pet comes in contact with a wild or domestic animal that many have rabies, the pet must be quarantined for 6 months, at the expense of the owner. - if a vaccinated pet comes in contact with a wild or domestic animal that may have rabies, the pet must be given a booster rabies vaccination within 5 days of the contact. Schoharie County Public Health will provide free rabies vaccinations at the Gilboa Town Highway Garage on [Thu 8 Jun 2017] from 6-8 pm. Additional clinics will be scheduled for the fall. For questions or to report a suspected rabid animal, call Schoharie County Public Health at 295-8365. -- communicated by: ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts ****** [11] Colorado - warning, rabies on the rise - 48 positives in 5 months Date: Wed 24 May 2017, 6:48 PM Source: KDVR [edited] A warning for pet owners. The number of rabies cases keeps climbing in Colorado--and so does the concern. A number of health agencies and animal shelters urged residents to vaccinate their dogs and cats--and for good reason. Last year, 88 animals tested positive for the fatal disease. Those animals exposed 113 domestic pets. And, so far this year [2017], we're on pace to surpass those numbers. Veterinarian Kristina Ingram couldn't have imagined what she'd encounter while working at Community Pet Hospital in Thornton about 2 weeks ago. \"He was showing some neurologic signs, tremoring a little bit,\" she said. Dr Ingram examined a 6 week old puppy that ended up testing positive for rabies. It's the 1st time wildlife has infected a dog in Colorado in more than 40 years. \"They have not had a contracted in-the-state canine rabies case since 1974,\" she said. A dog tested positive in Colorado 14 years ago, but it had come in from Texas. \"They asked, 'How did he contract rabies?' I said, 'With a wildlife encounter a bite or scratch,\" she told the family. They told her a skunk had scratched the Australian-Shepherd-mix and killed another puppy in Weld County. Skunks are the biggest carrier of rabies so far this year [2017]. A Denver resident captured video of a rabid skunk 3 May 2017. It had been living beneath her porch. Colorado's Department of Health data shows 38 skunks tested positive for rabies so far this year [2017]. That is the most of any animal. A total of 14 of them in Jefferson County alone. That's followed by 5 bats testing positive in 5 counties. [This sentence is slightly unclear: is it 5 bats per county for 5 counties or 1 bat per county for 5 counties? - Mod.TG]. All together in 16 Colorado counties, 48 animals have tested positive with 7 months to go in 2017. \"There's nothing we can do. It's fatal once the clinical signs start to show,\" Dr. Ingram said. She said the virus travels to the brain, killing the animal, and risking human lives, too. Pet owners realize vaccinating your pet is the best defense for everyone in the family. \"It's terrifying ... this is a huge public health risk. All humans come in contact with it.\" Foothills Animal Shelter offers affordable rabies vaccines every Friday from 4:00 to 5:30 pm and the 1st Saturday of every month from 9:00 to 10:30 am. The Denver Animal Shelter offers a similar program. And with summer upon us, the Jefferson County Health Department is reminding residents to protect themselves, not just against rabies, but West Nile virus, the plague and tick fever. [byline: Tammy Vigil] -- communicated by: ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts ****** [12] Missouri - bat, human exposure Date: Fri 26 May 2017 Source: Southeast Missourian [edited] A bat, which recently bit an individual in a wooded area of Cape Girardeau County, has tested positive for rabies, public health officials said [Thu 25 May 2017]. The victim underwent post-exposure treatment and has experienced no health issues, said Jane Wernsman, director of the Cape Girardeau County Public Health Center. Wernsman said the incident happening a couple of weeks ago, was the 1st confirmed rabies case this year in Cape Girardeau County. Animal rabies occurs year-round in Missouri, with the highest number of incidents occurring in late spring, summer or early fall when animals are most active, she said. \"One risk of being bitten by animals such as skunks, bats and stray dogs and cats is that of developing rabies,\" Wernsman said in a news release. [byline: Mark Bliss] -- communicated by: ProMED-mail ****** [13] Kentucky - canine, human exposure presumed Date: Fri 26 May 2017, 3:26 AM Source: Sentinel News [edited] The death of a Shelby County puppy is the 1st in more than 2 decades to be caused from rabies, health officials say. The 3 month old puppy, a Great Pyrenees, had been adopted by a Shelby County family from a breed of puppies born in Spencer County. Tony Millet, environmental supervisor and public information officer at the North Central Health Department, said the puppy tested positive for rabies. [byline: Lisa King] -- communicated by: ProMED-mail [Very few of these articles discuss rabies vaccine clinics, or notifying the public to be sure their pets' vaccinations are up to date. Likewise, very few of them discuss vaccination of our domestic pets helps to build a barrier between this disease and ourselves. This collection of reports includes a case of rabies in humans. This is extremely sad as there are only rare cases of humans surviving this disease, and those that do, are usually impaired in some fashion and do not recover completely. Sadly, given the statistics of how few survive, this is likely to be a sad outcome for the person and the person's family. But it should serve as a warning to all that bites from any animal can potentially be serious. If the animal is wild, then one has to believe an unprovoked attack would be from a rabid animal. Likewise, an unprovoked bite from a domestic animal should involve finding out if the animal was vaccinated. While we don't get many reports of sheep having rabies, they clearly do. There is also a vaccine for these animals. It is likely that more sheep have rabies than is actually reported. This may be because of the way sheep are raised. They may be killed by predators, as they could be an easy target. Wool holds heat and cause deterioration quickly, so by the time the producer finds the dead animal, it may not be in any sort of condition for testing. Brains deteriorate extremely rapidly. Several of these articles reference people being treated against rabies. This is what is called \"a post exposure prophylaxis\". National Association of State Public Health Veterinarians Compendium of Animal Rabies Prevention is a suggested guideline, but it is not a force of law regarding rabies. It may be found at  . The World Health Organization guidelines for post exposure rabies prophylaxis may be found at  while the Center for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) guidelines may be found at  - Mod.TG A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  .] [", "AVIAN INFLUENZA, HUMAN (54): CHINA, H7N9, WHO ********************************************* A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases In this update: [1] Hubei [2] Shanxi [3] Sichuan [4] WHO Update - 23 May 2017 ****** [1] Hubei Date: Mon 29 May 2017, 9:13 AM Source: FIC (Flu Information Centre/Flu in China) [edited] According to the authority, Xiangcheng district of Xiangyang city in Hubei province reported 1 human H7N9 AIV case on [27 May 2017] after the confirmation from provincial Center for Disease Control. The 59 year old male, lived in Xiangcheng district of Xiangyang city, had live poultry contact history and live poultry market exposure history, was in a stable condition and remained in designated hospital in Wuhan for treatment and quarantine. All close contacts showed no ILI symptoms so far. -- communicated by: ProMED-mail ****** [2] Shanxi Date: Wed 24 May 2017, 0:17 AM Source: FIC (Flu Information Centre/Flu in China) [edited] According to the HFPC [Health and Family Planning Commission] of Shanxi province, Taiyuan city reported 1 imported human H7N9 case on [23 May 2017]. The 57 year old man is a farmer, who resides in Pianguan county of Xinzhou city. He had onset of symptoms such as fever, cough and fatigue on [7 May 2017]. He was diagnosed as a human H7N9 case after the provincial expert team considered the clinical symptoms, epidemiological history and positive lab result. He remained in the designated hospital (Taiyuan 4th hospital) for treatment and quarantine. -- communicated by: ProMED-mail ****** [3] Sichuan Date: Wed 24 May 2017, 9:59 PM Source: FIC (Flu Information Centre/Flu in China) [edited] According to the authority, Yantan district of Zigong city reported one human H7N9 AIV case on [24 May 2017]. This is the second human H7N9 AIV case reported in Zigong city. The 63 year old male, had raised 35 chicken and ducks by himself, had live poultry contact history, was in a stable condition and remained in the designated hospital for treatment and quarantine. All close contacts showed no ILI symptoms so far. Sichuan province has reported 34 human H7N9 AIV cases so far. -- communicated by: ProMED-mail ****** [4] WHO update - 23 May 2017 Date: Tue 23 May 2017 Source: WHO emergencies preparedness, response, Disease Outbreak News (DONs) [edited] On [Sat 13 May 2017], the National Health and Family Planning Commission of China (NHFPC) notified WHO of 23 additional laboratory-confirmed cases of human infection with avian influenza A(H7N9) virus in China. Details of the case patients ---------------------------- Onset dates ranged from [11 Apr to 6 May 2017]. Of these 23 case patients, 10 were female. The median age was 58 years (range 31 to 83 years). The case patients were reported from Beijing (2), Fujian (1), Gansu (1), Hebei (5), Henan (3), Hubei (1), Jiangsu (2), Shaanxi (3), Sichuan (3), Tianjin (1), and Zhejiang (1). At the time of notification, there were 7 deaths, 15 case patients were diagnosed as having either pneumonia (5) or severe pneumonia (10), and 1 case was mild. A total of 19 case patients were reported to have had exposure to poultry or live poultry market, 1 case patient was reported to have visited a patient with avian influenza A(H7N9) in the hospital, 1 case patient was reported to have had both exposure to live poultry and a contact with a confirmed case, and 2 were reported to have had no known poultry exposure. Two clusters were reported: - A 63 year old male from Xi'an, Shaanxi Province. He had symptom onset on [29 Apr 2017] and was admitted to hospital on [2 May 2017]. His symptoms were mild. He had visited a confirmed case in the hospital, a 62 year old male from Shaanxi Province with symptom onset on [18 Apr 2017] who was previously reported to WHO on [5 May 2017]. - A 37 year old female from Chengde, Hebei Province. She had symptom onset on [2 May 2017] and was admitted to hospital on [3 May 2017]with pneumonia. She raised backyard poultry before her onset. She also had contact with a confirmed case, her mother, a 62 year old with symptom onset on [16 April 2017] and who was previously reported to WHO on [5 May 2017]. To date, a total of 1486 laboratory-confirmed human infections with avian influenza A(H7N9) virus have been reported through IHR [International Health Regulations] notification since early 2013. Public health response ---------------------- The Chinese governments at national and local levels are taking further measures, mainly including: - convening a video conference with some key epidemic provinces to provide avian influenza A(H7N9) epidemic information and guidance on strengthening risk assessment and prevention and control measures; - continuing to strengthen control measures with a focus on hygienic management of live poultry markets and cross-regional transportation; - conducting detailed source investigations to inform effective prevention and control measures; - continuing to detect and treat cases of human infection with avian influenza A(H7N9) early to reduce mortality; - continuing to carry out risk communication and issue information notices to provide the public with guidance on self-protection; - strengthening virology surveillance to better understand levels of virus contamination in the environment as well as mutations, in order to provide further guidance for prevention and control. WHO risk assessment ------------------- The number of human infections with avian influenza A(H7N9) and the geographical distribution in the 5th epidemic wave (that is, onset since [1 Oct 2016]) is greater than in earlier waves. This suggests that the virus is spreading, and emphasizes that further intensive surveillance and control measures in both the human and animal health sector are crucial. Most case patients are exposed to avian influenza A(H7N9) virus through contact with infected poultry or contaminated environments, including live poultry markets. Since the virus continues to be detected in animals and environments, and live poultry vending continues, further human infections can be expected. Although small clusters of human infection with avian influenza A(H7N9) virus have been reported including those involving patients in the same ward, current epidemiological and virologic evidence suggests that this virus has not acquired the ability of sustained transmission among humans. Therefore the likelihood of further community level spread is considered low. Close analysis of the epidemiological situation and further characterization of the most recent viruses are critical to assess associated risk and to adjust risk management measures in a timely manner. WHO advice ---------- WHO advises that travellers to countries with known outbreaks of avian influenza should avoid, if possible, poultry farms, contact with animals in live poultry markets, entering areas where poultry may be slaughtered, or contact with any surfaces that appear to be contaminated with faeces from poultry or other animals. Travellers should also wash their hands often with soap and water, and follow good food safety and good food hygiene practices. WHO does not advise special screening at points of entry with regard to this event, nor does it currently recommend any travel or trade restrictions. As always, a diagnosis of infection with an avian influenza virus should be considered in individuals who develop severe acute respiratory symptoms while travelling in or soon after returning from an area where avian influenza is a concern. WHO encourages countries to continue strengthening influenza surveillance, including surveillance for severe acute respiratory infections (SARI) and influenza-like illness (ILI) and to carefully review any unusual patterns, ensure reporting of human infections under the IHR 2005, and continue national health preparedness actions. -- communicated by: ProMED-mail [ A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  .] [", "CRIMEAN-CONGO HEMORRHAGIC FEVER - IRAN: FATAL ********************************************* A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Sun 28 May 2017, 10:33 AM Source: PressTV [edited] Crimean-Congo hemorrhagic fever (CCHF) has killed 1 person in south eastern Iran over the past 2 months, Abbas Abbasi of Iran Veterinary Organization said on [Sun 28 May 2017]. The fatality occurred in Sistan-and-Baluchestan Province, with 2 more deaths also unofficially reported in Isfahan Province and the western province of Kermanshah via social media, he said. People mainly contract the CCHF virus from infected ticks or contact with infected animal blood and tissue. Abbasi said those people who work with livestock or process meat products are susceptible. Shepherds, people who work in slaughterhouses, butchers, and distributors are at risk, while nurses dealing with CCHF patients could also contract the virus. There are no vaccines available to immunize animals but precautionary measures include disinfection of livestock pens, submerging livestock in solutions for decontamination, and meat packaging safeguards. Besides, he advised the public to purchase meat from dependable outlets and avoid purchases from unregistered sources. In 2015, the disease took the lives of 3 people in Iran, which neighbors Afghanistan, Pakistan and Iraq where the virus has had a presence. According to the World Health Organization, CCHF's mortality rate is about 30 per cent and it is endemic to Africa, the Balkans and Ukraine, the Middle East and Central Asia. CCHF was 1st detected in the Crimea in 1944 and then in the Congo in 1969. In 2011, it was detected for the first time in ticks in Spain. -- communicated by: ProMED-mail [Although sporadic surveys of CCHF in livestock and humans have been undertaken since 1970, it was not however until the 1999 outbreak that CCHF was recognized as a major public health problem  . As many as 23 out of the 30 provinces of Iran are endemic for CCHFV and Sistan-va-Balouchistan, Isfahan, Fars, Khozestan are respectively the most heavily infected provinces. The report above also refers to human cases reported from 2 of the above mentioned endemic regions. Many different factors that affect the prevalence criteria for CCHF still remain unknown. Climate changes such as drought and warming in Iran and adjacent countries have increased tick populations and consequently numbers of CCHF cases in recent years. Therefore, human and veterinary surveillance of CCHF is an important aspect of monitoring the evolution of the virus as well as related vector distribution. - Mod.UBA A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  .] [", "YELLOW FEVER - AMERICAS (47): BRAZIL, PAHO/WHO ********************************************** A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Wed 24 May 2017 Source: PAHO/WHO epidemiological update yellow fever - 24 May 2017[edited] Situation summary in the Americas --------------------------------- Since epidemiological week (EW) 1 [Sun 1 to Sat 7 Jan 2017] to EW 19 [Sun 7 to Sat 13 May 2017] of 2017, Brazil, Colombia, Ecuador, Peru, the Plurinational State of Bolivia, and Suriname have reported suspected and confirmed yellow fever cases. The following is an update on the situation in Brazil. The situation in the other countries was reported in the epidemiological update of [25 Apr 2017] and in previous updates, and no significant changes have been reported since then. In Brazil, since the beginning of the outbreak in December 2016 up to [18 May 2017], there have been 3192 suspected cases of yellow fever reported (758 confirmed, 1812 discarded, and 622 remain under investigation), including 426 deaths (264 confirmed, 120 discarded, and 42 under investigation). The case fatality rate (CFR) among confirmed cases is 34 per cent. According to the probable site of infection, the cases were reported in 398 municipalities, while the confirmed cases were distributed among 131 municipalities in 7 states (Esp\u00edrito Santo, Goi\u00e1s, Minas Gerais, Par\u00e1, Rio de Janeiro, S\u00e3o Paulo, and Tocantins). With regard to the confirmed fatal cases and their probable site of infection, 80 were in Esp\u00edrito Santo, 1 in Goi\u00e1s, 164 in Minas Gerais, 4 in Par\u00e1, 5 in Rio de Janeiro, and 10 in S\u00e3o Paulo. In the states with more than 5 confirmed deaths, the CFR among confirmed cases is 50 per cent in S\u00e3o Paulo, 35 per cent in Rio de Janeiro, 34 per cent in Minas Gerais and Esp\u00edrito Santo. No cases or epizootics have been confirmed in new municipalities in Esp\u00edrito Santo (ES), Minas Gerais (MG), and S\u00e3o Paulo (SP) in the last 2 weeks. The dates of symptom onset of the most recently confirmed cases are [14 Mar 2017] (MG), [19 Apr 2017] (SP), and [24 Apr 2017] (ES). The state of Par\u00e1 reported 4 confirmed cases in EW 13 [week 26 Mar to 1 Apr 2017], and the state of Tocantins reported a confirmed case in EW 16 [16 to 22 Apr 2017]. In addition, a case was confirmed in the state of Goi\u00e1s in an area known to be at risk for yellow fever. Although no confirmed cases have been reported to date in the state of Bahia, since the beginning of the year up to [8 May 2017], a total of 255 epizootics [cases in monkeys] were reported in 78 municipalities; 54 of these epizootics were positive for yellow fever by RT-PCR in 28 municipalities, and 4 were in neighborhoods of Salvador. To date, the _Aedes aegypti_ vector has not been reported to have a role in transmission. However, confirmed epizootics in large cities, such as Vitoria in Esp\u00edrito Santo4 and Salvador in Bahia, represent a high risk for a change in the transmission cycle. Figure 1 shows the trend in the number of reported cases, according to their actual classification (confirmed, discarded, under investigation), in the 4 states that account for 99 per cent of all the confirmed cases. Figure 1 [graph]. Distribution of reported yellow fever cases by date of symptoms onset and probable state of infection. Brazil, [1 Dec 2016] to [18 May 2017]. Figure 2 illustrates the municipalities with confirmed cases and cases under investigation, as well as confirmed epizootics, and epizootics under investigation that correspond to the cumulative total in 3 different dates. Figure 2 [map]. Geographic distribution of human cases (confirmed/suspected) and confirmed epizootics of yellow fever, [31 Jan 2017], [2 Mar 2017], and [18 May 2017]. Since the beginning of the outbreak up to [18 May 2017], a total of 3660 deaths in nonhuman primates (NHP) were reported, of which 565 were confirmed for yellow fever, 96 were discarded, and 1467 remain under investigation. Between the release of yellow fever bulletins numbers 39 and 41 by the Brazil Ministry of Health, the number of reported deaths in NHP did not change. Epizootics in NHP were reported in the Federal District and in the states of Alagoas, Amazonas, Bahia, Goi\u00e1s, Esp\u00edrito Santo, Mato Grosso, Mato Grosso do Sul, Minas Gerais, Par\u00e1, Para\u00edba, Paran\u00e1, Pernambuco, Rio Grande do Norte, Rio Grande do Sul, Rio de Janeiro, Rond\u00f4nia, Roraima, Santa Catarina, S\u00e3o Paulo, Sergipe, and Tocantins. Reports of epizootics currently under investigation in states bordering Argentina, Bolivia, Colombia, Guyana, Paraguay, Peru, Suriname, Uruguay, and Venezuela represent a risk of spread of the virus to the bordering countries, especially in areas with similar ecosystems. With regard to the outbreak response implemented by the Brazil Ministry of Health, between January and May 2017, 24.5 million doses of yellow fever vaccine were distributed to intensify the selective vaccination strategy in 1028 municipalities of the states of Bahia, Esp\u00edrito Santo, Minas Gerais, Rio de Janeiro, and S\u00e3o Paulo. As of [18 May 2017], administrative coverage equal to or greater than 95 per cent was reached in 285 municipalities; coverage between 75 and 94.9 per cent was reached in 375 municipalities; and coverage of less than 75 per cent was reached in 368 municipalities (92 of these municipalities have coverage lower than 50 per cent). Recommendations --------------- Given the current yellow fever situation in Brazil and the emergence of cases in areas where cases have not been detected in several years, the Pan American Health Organization, Regional Office of the World Health Organization (PAHO/WHO) urges member states to continue efforts to detect, confirm, and adequately and timely treat cases of yellow fever. To this end, health care workers should be kept up-to-date and trained to detect and treat cases especially in areas of known virus circulation. PAHO/WHO encourages member states to take the necessary actions to keep travelers informed and vaccinated, when heading to areas where yellow fever vaccination is recommended. Vaccination ----------- The yellow fever vaccine is safe and affordable and provides effective immunity against the disease in the range of 80-100 per cent of those vaccinated after 10 days and 99 per cent immunity after 30 days. A single dose provides life-long protection against yellow fever disease. A booster dose of yellow fever vaccine is not needed. Given the limitations on the availability of vaccines and with the aim of promoting the rational use, PAHO / WHO reiterates its recommendations to national authorities: 1) conduct an assessment of vaccination coverage against yellow fever in areas at risk at the municipal level to guarantee at least 95 per cent coverage among the resident population of these areas; 2) member states that are not currently experiencing outbreaks should not conduct an immunization campaign. Priority should be given to the use of vaccines in susceptible populations and to avoid revaccination; 3) ensure vaccination of all travelers to endemic areas at least 10 days before traveling; 4) depending on vaccine availabilities, member states should have a small stock that allows them to respond to outbreaks; 5) postpone routine vaccination in children in non-endemic areas until sufficient vaccines are available. Once there is availability, catch-up campaigns should be conducted to complete vaccination schedules. Precautions ----------- It is recommended to individually assess the epidemiological risk of contracting disease when faced with the risk of an adverse event occurring in persons over 60 years who have not been previously vaccinated. - The vaccine can be offered to individuals with asymptomatic HIV infection with CD4+ counts \u2265 200 cells / mm3 requiring vaccination. - Pregnant women should be vaccinated in an emergency situation and following recommendations of health authorities. - Vaccination is recommended in lactating women who live in endemic areas, since the risk of transmitting the vaccine virus to the child is lower than the benefits of the vaccination of breastfeeding women. - For pregnant or lactating women traveling to areas with yellow fever transmission, vaccination is recommended when travel cannot be postponed or avoided. They should receive advice on the potential benefits and risks of vaccination to make an informed decision. The benefits of breastfeeding are superior to those of other nutritional alternatives. The following people are usually excluded from yellow fever vaccination: - immunocompromised individuals (Including those with thymus disorders, symptomatic HIV, malignant neoplasms under treatment, and those that are receiving or have received immunosuppressive or immunomodulatory treatments, recent transplants, and current or recent radiation therapy); - people with severe allergies to eggs and their derivatives. -- communicated by: ProMED-mail [Fortunately, the outbreak appears to be declining and still no instances have been documented of _Aedes aegypti_ urban transmission, although that risk will continue as long as the sylvan (forest) transmission cycle is occurring. Persistence of yellow fever virus in endemic sylvan (forest) cycles of transmission in Brazil and neighboring countries is reason enough to maintain a high proportion of the population -- at least 80 per cent -- vaccinated in areas of risk. The above report indicates that the availability of the vaccine is limited at this time. This doubtless is temporary and when stocks are improved, one hopes that efforts to provide vaccine coverage over broad areas of YF virus endemicity can continue, to avoid the lapses in coverage the led to this outbreak. Individuals planning on traveling to the affected areas in Brazil, or other countries where YF is endemic, should seek vaccination as soon as possible because there is a predicted vaccine shortage starting in mid - to late summer, this year (2017) in the USA. Maps of Brazil can be accessed at  and  . A map showing the South American countries mentioned can be accessed at  . - Mod.TY] [", "CHOLERA, DIARRHEA AND DYSENTERY UPDATE (40): AFRICA *************************************************** A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases In this update: Africa [1] Cholera - Kenya (Turkana county) [2] Cholera - Tanzania (Zanzibar) [3] Cholera - South Sudan ***** [1] Cholera - Kenya (Turkana county) Date: Sat 27 May 2017 Source: Daily Nation [edited] Refugees in Kakuma camp have been treated for cholera following an outbreak. Turkana County health and sanitation executive Jane Ajele said the 25 inhabitants were treated at Kakuma Mission Hospital. Among the patients was a child who had experienced bouts of diarrhea. \"We received around 25 suspected patients and when samples were sent to the Center for Disease Control and Prevention they turned out to be cholera positive. But no death has been recorded,\" she said. Ms Ajele said some of the hospitalized patients were isolated to prevent further spread of the disease. Following the outbreak, some of the measures the Joseph Nanok-governed county has taken to stanch further infections include shutting down 20 restaurants in Kakuma town because they did not meet the required health standards. The Health executive added that overcrowding and poor sanitation are to blame for the outbreak within the camp. \"Our surveillance team is on high alert and we have even dispatched a team to Nadapal on the border of Kenya and South Sudan to screen all new arrivals from South Sudan. \"A member of the host community admitted at Kakuma Mission Hospital for diarrhea tested negative [for cholera],\" she added. The disease situation is not limited to Turkana only, on [Thu 18 May 2017] in Nairobi's Karen suburb 3 people tested positive for the disease. They had attended a wedding; and the county's health executive Bernard Muia said they might have contracted the infection from western Kenya. Dr Muia added that more cases were reported in Murang'a and Garissa counties. Treatment centres are now on high alert and locals have been advised to visit health facilities when they show symptoms such as diarrhea. [byline: Sammy Lutta] -- communicated by: ProMED-mail [Turkana County is a county in the former Rift Valley Province of Kenya. Turkana is the 2nd largest (after Marsabit County) and also the north western-most county in Kenya. It is bordered by the countries of Uganda to the west; South Sudan and Ethiopia, including the disputed Ilemi Triangle, to the north and north east; and Lake Turkana to the east. Its location can be seen on a map at  . Active outbreaks of cholera are certainly occurring in South Sudan and Ethiopia. - Mod. LL] ****** [2] Cholera - Tanzania (Zanzibar) Date: Sat 28 May 2017, 1:36 PM Source: XinHua Net [edited] Tanzania's semi-autonomous Zanzibar archipelago has banned street food vendors following a fresh outbreak of cholera. Acting minister of health and social welfare in Zanzibar Riziki Pemba Juma blamed poor sanitation on floods caused by heavy rains hitting the archipelago for the last month. She said apart from banning street food vendors, the Zanzibar government has also restricted people from inviting and sharing the iftar -- the evening meal when Muslims end their daily Ramadan fast at sunset. During the holy month, it is common for people to invite and share food with those less fortunate. Riziki said that the ban came after the discovery of 23 new cases of cholera in Muslim-majority Zanzibar. The new cholera outbreak has compelled the Zanzibar government to establish special camps to deal with cholera victims, the minister said. \"We are encouraging people in their localities to observe hygiene and take precautions on the disease as well as ensuring that once they diagnose someone with symptoms of cholera to take him/her to the nearby health facility for treatment,\" she said, adding that the government has all the medication needed to cope with a possible epidemic. Mohammed Dahoma, director of hospital services in Zanzibar, said that a 3 month old infant is among the 23 patients. In 2016, at least 68 people died out of 4330 who were infected with the disease. -- communicated by: ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts [Zanzibar is a semi-autonomous part of Tanzania in East Africa. It is composed of the Zanzibar Archipelago in the Indian Ocean, 25-50 km (approx. 16-31 mi) off the coast of the mainland, and consists of many small islands and 2 large ones: Unguja (the main island, referred to informally as Zanzibar) and Pemba. A map can be found at:  . - Mod.LL] ****** [3] Cholera - South Sudan Date: Sat 28 May 2017, 10:15 PM Source: XinHua Net [edited] At least 248 people have died from cholera outbreak across 19 counties in South Sudan since the initial outbreak was reported in June 2016, the UN says. The UN Office for Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) said as of [15 May 2017], 8160 cholera cases had been reported since the initial case was recorded on [18 Jun 2016]. \"While the outbreak initially spread to counties along the River Nile, counties most recently affected are increasingly distant from the River. As many as 9 out of the 19 counties affected by the cholera outbreak since June 2016 have reported cholera cases in the past 4 weeks and are considered to have active transmission of the disease,\" OCHA said in its latest report released in Juba. Health experts have highlighted that the number of cases recorded could be as little as 10 per cent of the overall number of cholera cases occurring during the outbreak. According to OCHA, children and young adults under 30 years are the most affected, constituting 70 per cent of the cases. According to the UN, there are concerns that the outbreak will intensify and spread during the upcoming rainy season due to continued conflict, displacement and inadequate access to clean water and sanitation. This is the longest, most widespread and most deadly cholera outbreak since South Sudan became independent. In the 2014 outbreak, 6421 cases were reported, including 167 deaths, over 8 months, while in 2015, the cholera outbreak lasted 5 months and affected 1818 people, including 47 deaths, in 3 counties. \"The response has been challenging, however, due to the locus of many outbreaks in cattle camps, remote and militarized locations, ongoing population displacement, and insecurity in areas affected by the outbreak,\" said OCHA. It said with the rainy season approaching and displacement continuing, it is expected that the disease will continue to spread. -- communicated by: ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts [The mortality from cholera and most diarrheal illnesses is related to non-replacement of fluid and electrolytes from the diarrheal illness. As stated in Lutwick LI, Preis J, Choi P: Cholera. In: Chronic illness and disability: the pediatric gastrointestinal tract. Greydanus DE, Atay O, Merrick J (eds). NY: Nova Bioscience, 2017 (in press) oral rehydration therapy can be life-saving in outbreaks of cholera and other forms of diarrhea: \"As reviewed by Richard Guerrant et al (1), it was in 1831 that cholera treatment could be accomplished by intravenous replacement, and, although this therapy could produce dramatic improvements, not until 1960 was it 1st recognized that there was no true destruction of the intestinal mucosa, and gastrointestinal rehydration therapy could be effective, and the therapy could dramatically reduce the intravenous needs for rehydration. Indeed, that this rehydration could be just as effective given orally as through an orogastric tube (for example, refs 2 and 3) made it possible for oral rehydration therapy (ORT) to be used in rural remote areas and truly impact on the morbidity and mortality of cholera. Indeed, Guerrant et al (1) highlights the use of oral glucose-salt packets in war-torn Bangladeshi refugees, which reduced the mortality rate from 30 per cent to 3.6 per cent (4) and quotes sources referring to ORT as \"potentially the most important medical advance\" of the 20th century. A variety of formulations of ORT exist, generally glucose- or rice powder-based, which contain a variety of micronutrients, especially zinc (5). \"The assessment of the degree of volume loss in those with diarrhea to approximate volume and fluid losses can be found in ref 6 below. Those with severe hypovolemia should be initially rehydrated intravenously with a fluid bolus of normal saline or Ringer's lactate solution of 20-30 ml/kg followed by 100 ml/kg in the 1st 4 hours and 100 ml/kg over the next 18 hours with regular reassessment. Those with lesser degrees of hypovolemia can be rehydrated orally with a glucose or rice-derived formula with up to 4 liters in the 1st 4 hours, and those with no hypovolemia can be given ORT after each liquid stool with frequent reevaluation.\" References ---------- 1. Guerrant RL, Carneiro-Filho BA, Dillingham RA. Cholera, diarrhea, and oral rehydration therapy: triumph and indictment. Clin Infect Dis. 2003;37(3):398-405. 2. Gregorio GV, Gonzales ML, Dans LF, Martinez EG. Polymer-based oral rehydration solution for treating acute watery diarrhoea. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2009;(2):CD006519. doi: 10.1002/14651858.CD006519.pub2. 3. Gore SM, Fontaine O, Pierce NF. Impact of rice based oral rehydration solution on stool output and duration of diarrhoea: meta-analysis of 13 clinical trials. BMJ 1992; 304(6822): 287-91. 4. Mahalanabis D, Choudhuri AB, Bagchi NG, Bhattacharya AK, Simpson TW. Oral fluid therapy of cholera among Bangladesh refugees. Johns Hopkins Med. 1973; 132(4): 197-205. 5. Atia AN, Buchman AL. Oral rehydration solutions in non-cholera diarrhea: a review. Am J Gastroenterol. 2009; 104(10): 2596-604, doi: 10.1038/ajg.2009.329. 6. WHO. The treatment of diarrhoea, a manual for physicians and other senior health workers. 4th ed. 2005. - Mod.LL A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  .] [", "PORCINE EPIDEMIC DIARRHEA - NORTH AMERICA (02): CANADA (MANITOBA) ***************************************************************** A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Fri 26 May 2017 Source: Manitoba Cooperator [edited] Another 2 barns in south east Manitoba have tested positive for porcine epidemic diarrhea (PED) in the 4th and 5th cases of the disease this year [2017]. A finisher and sow barn were confirmed PED positive in the space of 2 days. Manitoba Pork Council general manager Andrew Dickson said finisher barn staff noticed signs [on Sun 14 May 2017]. \"That doesn't mean every pig in the barn has got it at this moment in time, it just means some of the pigs got it, but it's likely to spread,\" Dickson said. The pork council is acting on the assumption that the whole barn is infected. \"The question that then rises is it's a feeder barn, so did the baby pigs that went into that barn, did they bring it in?\" Dickson said. Another case was confirmed in a nearby sow barn [on Thu 18 May 2017]. Manitoba chief veterinary officer, Dr Megan Bergman, was not available for comment, but previously told industry broadcast Farmscape that an investigation was under way into the source of the infections. The newest report brings Manitoba's PED cases to 15 since the virus was discovered in the province in 2014. Losses are not known. \"With the feeder operations, what you tend to do is you get some sick pigs and you get some that don't make it, but a chunk of them will get through it,\" Dickson said. The larger danger, he noted, was to young animals. The virus is known to cause up to 100 per cent mortality in suckling pigs. Facilities that have been in contact or lie within 5 kilometres [3.10 miles] of infected farms have been asked to monitor for the disease. Testing is ongoing and the provincial Emergency Operations Center has been active since initial reports of the outbreak. Infected locations have been revealed to veterinarians with clients in the 5 kilometre bubble. Sows in infected locations are being exposed to the virus to bolster immunity in the next generation, the pork council has said. All infected locations are under bio containment and farm traffic is being strictly controlled. The Manitoba Pork Council has released expanded biosecurity measures in reaction to the outbreak. Farms in the warning area are encouraged to limit traffic and erect signs or barriers to enforce the rule, wear approved footwear, restrict parking to driveways and roads off site, lime driveways and avoid vehicle contact with dead animals or garbage, which should have a designated pickup zone at the end of the driveway. \"We know there's been good uptake on the biosecurity because we've got relatively few incidents of this disease compared to what we have in the United States or Ontario,\" Dickson said. Ontario broke 100 PED cases this spring while over 3000 sites in the United States have tested positive for the virus between 5 June 2014 and 27 April 2017, according the United States Department of Agriculture. The Manitoba Pork Council has stressed caution when visiting assembly yards and processing plants, which might house the virus, or when transporting animals to or from the United States. \"It's really important that the trailers coming back be properly washed and disinfected in wash stations in Manitoba, even though they might have gone to a wash station in the United States,\" Dickson said. Language grew stronger after the most recent confirmed case. \"All producers within the area are strongly encouraged to ensure full compliance of their existing biosecurity protocols -- every person, every time -- and to contact their herd veterinarian about how to further enhance their protocols. Special focus should be devoted to personnel entry into the barn and load-out area biosecurity,\" the pork council advised in its latest PED update. Since information shared with the province is normally confidential, producers are also encouraged to sign waivers allowing veterinarians to share medical information with each other. \"It's important that all the veterinarians in the province know what this disease is because you get a barn in south east Manitoba supplying baby pigs to a barn in western Manitoba. The vets need to know what's going on,\" Dickson said. All 15 locations where PED has been confirmed in Manitoba have submitted waivers, Dickson said. Barns now face the prospect of disinfecting facilities once signs have abated. \"With the feeder barns, they're going to have to move the animals out,\" Dickson said. \"They'll probably have to be moved to the United States, but they have to wait until there's no signs of the disease. For the sow barns, which produce the weanlings, you can't ship the weanlings to the United States without a health certificate and that means that the animals have to be clear of the disease for 60 days, so that's going to hinder their plans.\" [byline: Alexis Stockford] -- communicated by: ProMED-mail [Viruses are impossible to see, and what cannot be seen can more easily slip through a biosecurity protocol. Someone forgets to wash the boots or the truck. It almost takes 2 people at a time to remember to do it every time until it is always a habit. Manitoba is working hard to control this situation and to find the source. When they find the source we would appreciate insight into the investigation. - Mod.TG A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  .] [", "DICKEYA BLACKLEG, POTATO - MOROCCO: FIRST REPORT ************************************************ A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: May 2017 Source: Plant Disease [edited] [ref: S Oulghazi et al (2017): First report of _Dickeya dianthicola_ causing blackleg disease on potato in Morocco. Plant Disease, 'First Look'; DOI: 10.1094/PDIS-04-17-0548-PDN] -------------------------------------------------------------------- In Morocco, _Pectobacterium carotovorum_ is described as the main causative agent of blackleg and soft rot diseases on several plants and crops including _Solanum tuberosum_. In March 2016, blackleg symptoms were observed in commercial potato fields in the North of Morocco. Isolation of pectinolytic bacteria was performed. To determine the identity of the potential pectinobacteria, PCR has been used targeting the pelADE genes. Sixty nine isolates were identified as _Pectobacterium_ spp. and 20 as _Dickeya_ spp. 10 Dickeya isolates were subjected to PCR targeting the dnaX and rrs 16S rDNA genes. Both dnaX and rrs sequences showed 100 per cent and 97 per cent identity with published _D. dianthicola_ sequences, respectively. A Multilocus Sequence Analysis (MLSA) of the concatenated 16S rDNA and dnaX gene fragments of the Moroccan isolates in comparison with complete genomes from _D. chrysanthemi_ NCPPB 516, _D. dadantii_ 3937, _D. dianthicola_ RNS049, _D. solani 3337_, _D. zeae_ 1591 and _P. atrosepticum_ CFBP6276 showed that all Moroccan _Dickeya_ strains were clustered in the _D. dianthicola_ clade. Koch's postulates were completed on potato plants in order to verify the pathogenicity of the 10 Moroccan _D. dianthicola_ isolates. Six plants were infected by each of the isolates. All inoculated stems showed black, rotten stems, but control plants remained symptomless. In conclusion, molecular and symptomatic analysis demonstrated the occurrence of _D. dianthicola_ from some potato fields in Morocco, and showed that _D. dianthicola_ strains are virulent on potato. These findings will increase awareness and offer new technologies to avoid the spread of _Dickeya_ in potatoes. -- communicated by: ProMED-mail [Blackleg of potato can be caused by several species and subspecies of bacteria in the genera _Pectobacterium_ and _Dickeya_. Symptoms may include stem rot leading to leaf yellowing, wilting and stunting of plants, as well as tuber rot, which usually starts at the stem end of the tuber. The bacteria are spread with contaminated plant or other material (including seed tubers), by mechanical means, and water. Disease management may include seed tuber handling and cultural techniques, use of clean planting material and phytosanitation to prevent introduction of the pathogen from external sources. Low levels of seed tuber infection pose a major risk of pathogen spread, and certification schemes are a vital part of disease management for these pathogens. Population shifts of the blackleg pathogens are being observed in many areas. For example, _P. atrosepticum_ was considered to be the main blackleg pathogen in Europe, until the emergence of the more virulent new species _D. solani_ (ProMED-mail post http://promedmail.org/post/20091207.4162). _P. wasabiae_ and _D. dianthicola_ are also known to cause the disease in Europe. In the US, _D. dianthicola_ has been known to be present on ornamentals but has only recently been observed on potato (ProMED-mail post http://promedmail.org/post/20160509.4211696). _D. solani_ has not yet been detected in the Americas. _P. carotovorum_ subsp. _brasiliensis_ (Pcb) has been reported as a causal agent from a number of countries in different parts of the world, and in the Netherlands it has replaced a predominant _D. solani_ within just a few years (ProMED-mail post http://promedmail.org/post/20160128.3974722). Possible reasons for these population shifts are thought to be climate changes and selection pressure due to intensified agriculture. _Pectobacterium_ and _Dickeya_ species or subspecies also cause bacterial soft rot of potato. The pathogens can also affect other crops, causing, for example, a foot rot disease in rice as well as stem and root rot of sweet potato. Maps Morocco: Africa, overview: Pictures Symptoms of blackleg on potato shoots: (plant) and (stem) Blackleg, tuber symptoms: and Links Information on potato blackleg (and soft rot):  ,  and Genus _Dickeya_ taxonomy: Taxonomy of other bacteria via:  and  . - Mod.DHA A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  .] [", "TRANSBOUNDARY ANIMAL DISEASES - STATUS RECOGNITION, MEMBER COUNTRIES: OIE ************************************************************************* A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Thu 25 May 2017 Source: OIE press release [edited] The World Assembly of OIE Delegates distributed 17 certificates for official disease status recognition ------------------------------------------------------------------- OIE's official disease status can be issued for 6 priority diseases and are of major importance to OIE members. Recognized by the World Trade Organization (WTO) as reference standards in the field of animal health, these official statuses reflect the level of transparency and quality of the veterinary services of the country, increase the value of its livestock sector and facilitate access to regional and international markets. New countries and zones obtained official recognition of their disease status* during the current World Assembly: Paraguay and Romania were recognized as being \"free from CSF\" [classical swine fever], as well as a zone in Colombia; Botswana was recognized as being \"free from PPR\" [peste des petits ruminants]; Poland was recognized as having a \"negligible BSE risk\" [bovine spongiform encephalopathy], as well as 2 zones in United Kingdom (Scotland and Northern Ireland); Brazil and South Africa were granted \"free CBPP\" [contagious bovine pleuropneumonia] status; A zone in Botswana was officially recognized as \"free from FMD [foot and mouth disease] without vaccination\"; Paraguay as well as several zones, one in Chinese Taipei and 5 in Kazakhstan, were recognized as \"FMD free with vaccination\". All recognized disease status will soon be available online. To increase transparency all along the process for disease status recognition, and demonstrate its robustness, the OIE has revised its official procedure and presented it today [Thu 25 May 2017] to member countries. *Countries can request official OIE recognition of their disease status in regard to the 6 following diseases: bovine spongiform encephalopathy (BSE), foot and mouth disease (FMD), contagious bovine pleuropneumonia (CBPP), African horse sickness (AHS), peste des petits ruminants (PPR); classical swine fever (CSF). Official endorsement of national control programs applies to the following diseases: FMD, CBPP and PPR. -- communicated by: ProMED-mail [In May 1994, the World Assembly of Delegates of the OIE requested the Foot and Mouth Disease and Other Epizootics Commission (re-named later as Scientific Commission for Animal Diseases) to develop a procedure for the official recognition by the OIE of the foot and mouth disease (FMD) free status of member countries. The procedure has since then been expanded to include the official recognition of disease status for African horse sickness (AHS), classical swine fever (CSF), contagious bovine pleuropneumonia (CBPP), peste des petits ruminants (PPR) and bovine spongiform encephalopathy (BSE) risk status as well as the endorsement of official control programs for CBPP, FMD and PPR. The official recognition of disease status of member countries is of great significance for international trade and constitutes one of the most important legal links between the OIE and World Trade Organization (WTO), in the framework of the WTO Agreement on the Application of Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures (SPS Agreement), which entered into force in 1995. In 1998, the official agreement between WTO and the OIE further confirmed the OIE's mandate to recognize disease-and pest-free areas based on the SPS Agreement. FMD being the 1st transboundary animal disease issue selected for the above procedure is not incidental; this virus is extremely infectious and can be spread not only by transported or traded live animals but also by their products, such as meat, dairy products and hides, as well as other commodities, including utensils and animal feed. Bone-in meat has been one of the recognized potential vehicles of FMD in international trade. The FMD virus is also regarded windborne in certain conditions, challenging countries which neighbor infected territories without direct contacts. These well-studied high risks are behind the severe requirements from the Veterinary Services of countries wishing to obtain recognition as being FMD-free. Their infrastructures, available legislation and documented performance, are evaluated prior to recognition. The requirements are particularly demanding when the candidate country borders FMD-endemic countries. This year [2017], 4 countries have been addressed: Botswana, Paraguay, Chinese Taipei and Kazakhstan. Chinese Taipei is separated by sea from its closest (and infected) neighbor, mainland China, lending this country a comparative advantageous zoo sanitary situation. The other 3 counties share terrestrial common borders with their neighbor countries. Of these, Paraguay enjoys its geographic situation in South America, where no FMD case has been recorded for 41 months. An evaluation of Paraguay's Veterinary Services (2009) is available at  . Botswana, sharing borders with several infected countries (map at  ; click on Botswana, zoom in), has developed a system to guarantee sustainable FMD-freedom of the recognized zone. An evaluation of Botswana's veterinary services (2010) is available at  . The requirements include proper identification of each head of cattle, efficient control upon animal movements, in particular transboundary, and an ongoing surveillance. Kazakhstan shares borders with several FMD-endemic countries, on its south and east: map at ; click on Kazakhstan, zoom in. Kazakhstan has undergone a PVS evaluation, similar to Paraguay and Botswana, but its PVS report is not publicly available on the OIE website. (see \"OIE PVS Pathway for effective Veterinary Services; PVS Evaluation missions - State of play as of 15 May 2017\" at  ). Free access to Kazakhstan's PVS report will demonstrate transparency. See also commentary in http://promedmail.org/post/20160717.4350687. An OIE map showing Kazakhstan's 9 provinces recognized in 2015 as FMD-free without vaccination is available at  . The map shows also the 5 newly-recognized FMD-free provinces addressed in the current post, namely Kyzylorda, South Kazakhstan, Zhambyl, Almaty and East Kazakhstan. It also presents the names of the neighboring countries. - Mod.AS] [", "HANTAVIRUS - AMERICAS (34): URUGUAY (SORIANO) ********************************************* A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Sat 27 May 2017 Source: El Pais [in Spanish, trans. Mod.TY, edited] A school teacher from Soriano is currently in the Fray Bentos intensive care unit affected by [a] hantavirus [infection]. According to the physicians, her status for the past 15 days [has been] delicate. The individual is a young 24 year old working as a substitute teacher in a Soriano rural school according to Paolo Centomo, the Rio Negro deputy director of health. Initially, leptospirosis was suspected, but tests results ruled out this disease and led to confirmation that it is [a] hantavirus [infection]. Both leptospirosis and hantavirus[es] are transmitted in rodent excrement. \"This teacher had an epidemiological history because she was cleaning a storage shed that had been closed for a long time, and saw rodent excrement [there]. She wanted to clean it to make a recreational center for children, and later she began to have symptoms,\" Centomo indicated to Fray Bentos Channel 11. The physician stated that the disease could be acquired by breathing [dust] in very closed spaces such as storage buildings, where forage [accumulated by rodents] accumulates and produces dust in the air. \"Because of this, recommendations indicate that when going into [these closed areas] use mouth protection, ventilate the area and apply bleach just after going in,\" the professional stated. The Soriano health director, Alejandro Crosi, stated that the young woman currently presents with a generalized infection. The Soriano authorities have not confirmed the source of the infection but stated that the school \"is clean\". Field work was done. An evaluation of the school was done and it was in perfect condition, absolutely clean. There was nothing to make one think of the presence of rodents; the surrounding areas were very clean,\" Crosi stated to Agesor. The health director explained that the pathology does not manifest itself \"so much time later\", referring to the cleanup of the storage shed that had been done 60 days before. The investigation to determine the origin of the disease does not discount the possibility that she became ill in her home. The 1st case of [a] hantavirus [infection] in Uruguay was diagnosed in 1997; up to the year 2013 there were 164 cases. The main symptoms are fever, muscle and abdominal pain, nausea and then respiratory insufficiency. When the case is acute, it requires hospitalization of the patient and respiratory assistance. [byline: Daniel Rojas] -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail [The report above does not mention which hantavirus was responsible for this or earlier cases in Uruguay. Although not mentioned specifically, the infections, and certainly the deaths, will have resulted from hantavirus pulmonary syndrome (HPS). Central Plata hantavirus could be the etiological agent responsible for these HPS cases. Its rodent host is the yellow pygmy rice rat, _Oligoryzomys flavescens_, complex of rodents. This rodent reservoir host sheds the virus in its saliva, urine and feces, contaminating the environment in which it lives and breeds. An image of this rodent can be accessed at  . This report was brought to our attention by Kathryn Soderholm  , whom we thank. - Mod.TY A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  .] [", "AVIAN INFLUENZA (104): DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF CONGO (ITURI) POULTRY, HPAI H5, FIRST REPORT, OIE *********************************************************************************************** A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Fri 26 May 2017 Source: OIE, WAHID weekly disease information 2017; 30 (22) [edited] Highly pathogenic avian influenza, Congo (Dem Rep of the) --------------------------------------------------------- Information received on 26 May 2017 from Mr Honore Robert N'Lemba Mabela, directeur et chef de service, Service de la Production & de la Sante Animale, Ministere de l'Agriculture, Peche et Elevage, Kinshasa, Congo (Dem Rep of the) Summary Report type: immediate notification Date of start of the event: 25 Apr 2017 Date of confirmation of the event: 24 May 2017 Reason for notification: first occurrence of a listed disease in the country Causal agent: highly pathogenic avian influenza virus Serotype: H5 Nature of diagnosis: laboratory (advanced) This event pertains to a defined zone within the country New outbreaks (3) Outbreak 1: Kafe, Djugu, Ituri Date of start of the outbreak: 25 Apr 2017 Outbreak status: continuing (or date resolved not provided) Epidemiological unit: village Total animals affected: Species / Susceptible / Cases / Deaths / Killed and disposed of / Slaughtered Birds / 6573 / 6569 / 6558 / 10 / 1 Affected population: male and females of all ages. Outbreak 2: Joo, Djugu, Ituri Date of start of the outbreak: 25 Apr 2017 Outbreak status: continuing (or date resolved not provided) Epidemiological unit: village Total animals affected: Species / Susceptible / Cases / Deaths / Killed and disposed of / Slaughtered Birds / 8148 / 6998 / 6031/ 0 / 0 Affected population: male and females of all ages. Outbreak 3: Tchomia, Djugu, Ituri Date of start of the outbreak: 25 Apr 2017 Outbreak status: continuing (or date resolved not provided) Epidemiological unit: village Total animals affected: Species / Susceptible / Cases / Deaths / Killed and disposed of / Slaughtered Birds / 6215 / 2218 / 167/ 0 / 0 Affected population: male and females of all ages. Summary of outbreaks Total outbreaks: 3 Total animals affected: Species / Susceptible / Cases / Deaths / Destroyed / Slaughtered Birds / 20 936 / 15 785 / 12 756 / 10 / 1 Outbreak statistics [rates apparent, expressed as percentages] Species / Morbidity rate / Mortality rate / Case fatality rate / Proportion susceptible animals lost* Birds / 75.4 / 60.9 / 80.8 / 61.0 *Removed from the susceptible population through death, destruction, and/or slaughter Epidemiology Source of the outbreak(s) or origin of infection: unknown or inconclusive Epidemiological comments Ducks are mostly raised in these localities near Lake Albert. Mortality has been higher in ducks than in hens. Positive samples have been taken on 21 ducks and one hen. Quantitative information provided concerns the ducks. H5N8 avian influenza virus is present in the neighboring country Uganda. Dense trade exchanges, mainly of poultry and poultry products, between the Democratic Republic of Congo and Uganda should not be overlooked. Duck mortality is high in Joo and Kafe. Surveillance has been reinforced in the containment zone to prevent the spread of the disease to the other Ituri territories. Other investigations are planned shortly in other territories of the province. Control measures Measures applied: movement control inside the country, surveillance within containment and/or protection zone, quarantine, zoning, vaccination prohibited, no treatment of affected animals Measures to be applied: surveillance outside containment and/or protection zone, stamping out, disinfection Diagnostic test results Laboratory name and type / Species / Test / Test date / Result Central veterinary laboratory of Kinshasa (National laboratory)/ Birds / real-time reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction (RRT-PCR) / 24 May 2017 / Positive Future reporting The event is continuing. Weekly follow-up reports will be submitted. [The location of the outbreaks can be seen on the interactive map included in the OIE report at the source URL above.] -- communicated by: ProMED-mail [This immediate notification responds and complements the request for information published in ProMED-mail posting http://promedmail.org/post/20170520.5050700. - Mod.CRD A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  .] [", "AVIAN INFLUENZA (105): NETHERLANDS, WILDFOWL, HPAI H5N5 ******************************************************* A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Tue 30 May 2017 19:21 Source: Official press release, Government of the Netherlands [in Dutch, transl., Mod.AS, edited] In the municipality of Utrecht, 2 dead wild geese were found to be infected by HPAI H5N5. This avian influenza variant may originate from a combination of the H5N8-type virus (which circulated in Europe last month [April 2017]) with a different, low pathogenic type. This H5N5 variant has been found more frequently in wild birds over the past few years. The risk of contamination has recently decreased so that almost all rural measures could be withdrawn as of [Wed 19 Apr 2017]. Although the risk has decreased, the virus is not completely gone. Thus, infected wild birds can be found. Alert among poultry holders is thus suggested. This includes the continued maintenance of good hygiene on the plant. -- communicated by Nati Elkin [A previous case of HPAI H5N5 in a wild bird (tufted duck) was reported to the OIE on [Tue 16 May 2017] (\"final report\"); reportedly, that case had started on 14 November 2016 and was confirmed on 13 December 2016. Since December 2016, HPAI subtype H5N5 has also been reported in Germany (in wild birds and poultry), Montenegro (wild birds), Italy (wild birds and captive birds), Croatia (wild birds), Greece (wild birds), Poland (wild birds), the Czech Republic (captive birds), Serbia (wild birds) and Slovenia (wild birds). - Mod.AS A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  .] [", "DENGUE/DHF UPDATE (06): ISRAEL ex SEYCHELLES ******************************************** A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Tue 30 May 2017 Source: From: Patricia Schlagenhauf , David Hamer [edited] Eli Schwarz from the GeoSentinel Tel Hashomer site in Israel has alerted us to a number of cases of dengue fever in Israeli travelers returning from a group tour to the Seychelles islands during the period April 13 to 22 2017. The group included 32 travelers and each day they visited a different island. The islands visited, in consecutive order, were: Mahe, Curieuse, Aride, Praslin, La digue and Moyenne. Febrile illness started 1-2 days after return to Israel in 9 of the travelers. In 6 of the febrile travelers DF was confirmed, in 4 by PCR and in the other 2 only by positive IgM serology. The other 3 were not tested for dengue. The PCR positive cases were all DENV-2. Laboratory workup was done by Dr Yaniv Lustig at Central Virology Laboratory, Israel Ministry of Health, Chaim Sheba Medical Center and by Prof Dana Wolf at Hadassah Medical center, Jerusalem Israel. Apart from the above-mentioned Israeli cases, only one recent case in the GeoSentinel database, from December 2016, was acquired in the Seychelles. This cluster of cases may signal an outbreak or increased dengue fever activity on these islands. Intending travelers should be advised to adhere to effective measures against mosquito bites during the daytime and early evening. -- David Hamer (PI GeoSentinel) Patricia Schlagenhauf (Chair: GeoSentinel Tracking and Communications) Kayce Maisel Project Coordinator International Society of Travel Medicine Dunwoody GA United States -- communicated by: ProMED-mail [A large outbreak of dengue was reported in Seychelles in May 2016 as well [ ] According to the Ministry of Health, from Jan 2016 to 10 Jun 2016, 388 people tested positive for dengue, with 85 per cent of the cases being under 40 years of age. Dengue vector mosquito Aedes Aegypti has been reported from the islands and outbreaks are reported mainly during the rainy season [ ]. In Seychelles there is high incidence of leptospirosis, now with dengue in circulation and the perfect climatic conditions for both diseases, patients presenting with dengue-like illness having high fever, muscular pain, headache or rash can be a challenging clinical diagnosis for treating physicians. Due to the strong similarity in clinical presentation and epidemiology between dengue and leptospirosis and reported occurrence of dual infections, it is advisable in patients presenting with acute febrile illness consistent with dengue-like illness to be evaluated for both dengue and leptospirosis, which could be a differential diagnosis in the negative cases from the above report. The confirmation of dengue infections in the travelers to Seychelles emphasizes the need for travel advice to ensure public education and timely protective measures. - Mod.UBA A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  ,  .] [", "FOODBORNE ILLNESS - PHILIPPINES: (MANILA REGION) PRISONERS, REQUEST FOR INFORMATION *********************************************************************************** A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases [1] Date: Mon 29 May 2017 2:15 PM Source: Manila Bulletin [edited] A total of 910 prisoners at the New Bilibid Prison (NBP) in Muntinlupa City have fallen ill due to apparent food poisoning since Fri 26 May 2017. Director general Benjamin Delos Santos of the Bureau of Corrections (BuCor) told The Manila Bulletin that the \"proximate cause is food served by caterer [Thu 25 May 2017] evening.\" However, investigators are also testing the facility's water source. \"(We) will do lab tests on food and water tomorrow [Mon 29 May 2017],\" said Delos Santos. Quoting the NBP report, he said 69 prisoners have been confined at the NBP Hospital and that one of them - an elderly inmate - was in critical condition. \"He is an elderly inmate from the minimum-security compound and has been ill before,\" he noted. At least 600 other prisoners were diagnosed with diarrhea and were attended to by doctors at the NBP Hospital emergency room since [Fri 26 May 2017]. Delos Santos said a total of 910 prisoners were affected including those who showed symptoms of diarrhea but could just be treated at their own dormitories in the Minimum Security, Medium Security and Maximum Security compounds. NBP Hospital doctors were reportedly orienting leaders of prison blocks on the proper response to treat diarrhea. Relatives of some of the inmates who rushed to the NBP to bring water and food said they spotted 2 water tankers enter the facility to ration water. The NBP has more than 22 000 inmates. [byline: Jonathan M Hicap] -- communicated by: ProMED-mail ****** [2] Date: Tue 30 May 2017 Source: UNTV News [edited] Justice secretary Vitaliano Aguirre II personally visited the New Bilibid Prison on [Mon 29 May 2017], to check on the condition of inmates affected by food poisoning. Aguirre confirmed that since [Fri 26 May 2017], the incident has already affected thousands of inmates who suffered severe stomach pains and diarrhea. Personnel from the Department of Health (DOH) have also arrived in the penitentiary to examine the portions of milkfish said to have poisoned the inmates, mostly from the Maximum-Security Compound. Aside from the milkfish, the DOH also examined the water supply in the facility which could have caused diarrhea. For now, Aguirre is awaiting the result of the test. Meanwhile, around 150 inmates are still under observation inside the NBP Hospital. One of them is currently in a critical condition. Aguirre said they have sent bananas and clean drinking water to help treat the inmates' diarrhea. [byline: Leslie Longboen] -- communicated by: ProMED-mail [The etiology of this large prison-associated foodborne illness is unclear. A variety of microorganisms could be associated with this diarrheal illness including salmonella, campylobacter and vibrio. ProMED-mail awaits additional information. With the possible food source being milkfish, it is tempting to implicate an aquatic microorganism such as a _Vibrio_ species such as _V. parahaemolyticus_ but even if the fish is the source, it could have been contaminated after harvesting. The milkfish (_Chanos chanos_) is the sole living species in the family _Chanidae_ ( ). The species has many common names. The Hawaiian name for the fish is awa. It is called bang\u00fas in the Philippines, where it is the national fish. In the Nauruan language, it is referred to as ibiya. Milkfish is also called \"bandeng\" or \"bolu\" in Indonesia. A picture of the fish can be found at the above URL. Of note, milkfish has been linked to scombroid fish poisoning (Lee Y-C, Kung H-F, Chien-Hui Wu C-H, et al. Determination of histamine in milkfish stick implicated in food-borne poisoning. J Food Drug Anal 2016;24: 63-71) caused by histamine formation in inadequately refrigerated fish but the illness does not seem to be histamine-related based on symptoms and timing. - Mod.LL A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  .] [", "SALMONELLOSIS - TURKEY: (MANISA) BARRACKS ***************************************** A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Mon 29 May 2017 Source: Prensa Latina [transl. Mod.KS] [edited] Bad meat could be the source of an infectious outbreak in a barracks in Turkey that has killed one soldier and hospitalized 1046, said Dr Tur Yildiz Bicer. The outbreak was detected on [Tue 23 May 2017] at the First Manisa Infantry Brigade training center in western Manisa, but the Ministry of Health has not offered any official conclusions, pending the outcome of an investigation by a team of 10 experts. Bicer, who is also a deputy of the main opposition group, the Republican People's Party (CHP), visited the soldiers being treated at the provincial hospital. As he later told the newspaper H\u00fcrriyet, tests concluded that soldiers were infected with salmonellosis through turkey meat, which was rarely served on the barracks menu. \"In the samples were found traces of _Salmonella_ bacteria, which are transmitted through meat, especially poultry, if it is not well cooked or is not stored according to health regulations,\" said the doctor. Soldiers ate turkey meat the night the outbreak began. He also reported that most of the patients belonged to a barracks whose dining room is subcontracted to a private company which manages 12 military units throughout the country. However, there was also a group of 64 who were hospitalized with similar symptoms, but were members of the 6th regiment of the Gendarmerie of Manisa, which have their own food service. A possible explanation is that both dining services made purchases from the same supplier. However, they have not yet performed an analysis of the water supply of the affected quarters, due to lack of time, Bicer said. Manisa's governor Mustafa Hakan G\u00fcvencer tried to unlink the nausea, vomiting and diarrhea present in those affected with food poisoning, instead claiming that they were suffering from 'stomach flu' due to the change of season. -- communicated by: ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts [It is not clear if the salmonellae were isolated from the poultry or from the ill individuals in this quite large outbreak. - Mod.LL A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  .] [", "CHOLERA, DIARRHEA AND DYSENTERY UPDATE (41): ASIA (YEMEN) ********************************************************* A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Wed 31 May 2017 Source: Anadolu Agency [edited] At least 532 people have died since a cholera epidemic broke out in war-torn Yemen in April 2017, according to WHO. In a Twitter post on [Wed 31 May 2017], WHO said more than 65 300 suspected cases of cholera have been recorded in 253 districts in the country. International organizations -- including the WHO, UNICEF and the International Committee of the Red Cross -- have recently stepped up the delivery of medical supplies to Yemen, where local health authorities are struggling to cope with the outbreak. Yemen fell into civil war in 2014 after Houthi rebels overran capital Sanaa and other provinces. In 2015, Saudi Arabia and its Arab allies launched a massive air campaign aimed at reversing Houthi gains and shoring up Yemen's pro-Saudi government. According to UN officials, more than 10 000 Yemenis have been killed in the conflict to date, while more than 11 per cent of the country's total population has been displaced from their homes. [byline: Mohamed al-Samei] -- communicated by: ProMED-mail [The statistics as shown below document this epidemic which seems to be progressing unabated: Date (2017) / Cases / Deaths 8 May / 1360 / 25 11 May / 2752 / 51 13 May / 8595 / 115 14 May / 11 000 / 180 17 May / 17 200 / 209 19 May / 23 500 / 242 21 May / 29 300 / 315 22 May / 35 217 / 361 24 May / 42 207 / 420 27 May / 51 832 / 471 30 May / 65 300 / 532 Aggressive interventions to stem this substantial outbreak in Yemen including a vaccination campaign are problematic because of the ongoing conflict going on in the country. An intervention with vaccine, if possible, could potentially stem the tide of the ongoing event. The following is extracted from Lutwick LI, Preis J, Choi P: Cholera. In: Chronic illness and disability: the pediatric gastrointestinal tract. Greydanus DE, Atay O, Merrick J (eds). NY: Nova Bioscience, 2017 (in press): \"For a variety of logistic, financial, and historical reasons, vaccines have not been available for cholera control programs outside of Viet Nam. Given as 2 or 3 dose courses, efficacy can be as high as 60-80 per cent for at least 2-3 years but much shorter protection lengths in children younger than 5 years of age. Cost-effectiveness, especially once an outbreak has occurred, had remained unproven until reports from Guinea (57) and Haiti (58) demonstrated utility. \"The current vaccines prequalified for use by WHO (59) are: - Dukoral (produced in Sweden) that contains several biotypes of O1 with recombinant cholera toxin B subunit, which also offers some protection against enterotoxigenic _E. coli_; - Shanchol (produced in India) that contains biotypes of both O1 and O139 without the recombinant B unit. In a large study in Kolkata, India, a cluster-randomized, double blind, placebo-controlled study of this product (60), the cumulative efficacy of the vaccine at 5 years was 65 per cent (95 per cent CI 52-74, p less than 0.0001). A locally-produced vaccine similar to this vaccine (mORCVAX) is produced in Viet Nam; - Euvichol (produced in South Korea) that, like Shanchol, contains both O1 and O139 without recombinant B subunit. This vaccine has been reported to be non-inferior to Shanchol in a Philippine study (61).\" References ---------- 57. Luquero FJ, Grout L, Ciglenecki I, et al. Use of _Vibrio cholerae_ vaccine in an outbreak in Guinea. N Engl J Med. 2014; 370(22): 2111-20;  . 58. S\u00e9v\u00e8re K, Rouzier V, Anglade SB, et al. Effectiveness of oral cholera vaccine in Haiti: 37-month follow-up. Am J Trop Med Hyg. 2016; 94(5): 1136-42;  . 59. Bhattacharya SK, Sur D, Ali M, et al. 5 year efficacy of a bivalent killed whole-cell oral cholera vaccine in Kolkata, India: a cluster-randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial. Lancet Inf Dis. 2013; 13(12): 1050-56; . 60. WHO. WHO prequalified vaccines.  . 61. Balk YO, Choi SK, Olveda RM, et al. A randomized, non-inferiority trial comparing two bivalent killed, whole cell, oral cholera vaccines (Euvichol vs Shanchol) in the Philippines. Vaccine 2015; 33(46): 6350-65; . - Mod.LL A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  .] [", "EUROPEAN FOULBROOD, APIS - EUROPE (03): ROMANIA (GORJ) OIE ********************************************************** A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Wed 31 May 2017 Source: OIE, WAHID (World Animal Health Information Database), weekly disease information 2017; 30(22) [edited] European foulbrood of honey bees, Romania ----------------------------------------- Information received on [and dated] 31 May 2017 from Dr Marius Grigore, director, head of Unit Animal Health Department General Sanitary Veterinary Directorate, National Sanitary Veterinary and Food Safety Authority, Bucharest, Romania Summary Report type: immediate notification Date of start of the event: 15 May 2017 Date of confirmation of the event: 19 May 2017 Reason for notification: reoccurrence of a listed disease Date of previous occurrence: 27 Oct 2016 Manifestation of disease: clinical disease Causal agent: _Melissococcus plutonius_ Nature of diagnosis: laboratory (advanced) This event pertains to a defined zone within the country. New outbreaks (1) Summary of outbreaks: Total outbreaks: 1 Outbreak 1: Bradet, Matasari, Gorj Date of start of the outbreak: 15 May 2017 Outbreak status: continuing (or date resolved not provided) Epidemiological unit: apiary Total animals affected: Species / Susceptible / Cases / Deaths / Killed and disposed of / Slaughtered Bees (hives) / 45 / 4 / 0 / - / 0 Outbreak statistics [rates apparent, expressed as percentages] Species / Morbidity rate / Mortality rate / Case fatality rate / Proportion susceptible animals lost* Bees (hives) / 9 / 0 / 0 / ** * Removed from the susceptible population through death, destruction, and/or slaughter ** Not calculated because of missing information Epidemiology Source of the outbreak(s) or origin of infection: unknown or inconclusive Control measures Measures applied: surveillance within containment and/or protection zone, official destruction of animal products, selective killing and disposal, vaccination permitted (if a vaccine exists), no treatment of affected animals Measures to be applied: no other measures Diagnostic test results Laboratory name and type / Species / Test / Test date / Result Institute for Diagnosis and Animal Health (National laboratory) / Bees / anatomo-pathological examination / 19 May 2017/ Positive Institute for Diagnosis and Animal Health (National laboratory) / Bees / polymerase chain reaction (PCR) / 19 May 2017/ Positive Future reporting The event is continuing. Weekly follow-up reports will be submitted. [The location of the outbreak can be seen on the interactive map included in the OIE report at the source URL above.] -- communicated by: ProMED-mail [\"European foulbrood (abbreviated EFB) is a bacterial disease that effects honey bee larvae before the capped stage. EFB is characterized by dead and dying larvae which can appear curled upwards, brown or yellow, melted, and/or dried out and rubbery. The causative bacteria, _Melissococcus plutoniu_, is ingested by honey bee larvae after which the bacterium competes for food inside the larvae. If the bacteria out-competes the larva, the larva will die before the cell is capped. Alternatively, the bee may survive until adulthood if the larvae have sufficient food resources. European foulbrood should not be confused with American foulbrood (AFB), which is caused by a different bacteria that produces different symptoms and control requirements.\" See  . In 2016 Romania reported European foulbrood of honey bees in the \"Judetul\" (County) of Mures and Prahova, see OIE annual report at  . - Mod.CRD A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  .] [", "BRUCELLOSIS - RUSSIA: (VORONEZH) LIVESTOCK, HUMAN ************************************************* A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Tue 30 May 2017 Source: Outbreak News Today [summarized, edited] An outbreak of brucellosis involving 2 villages in the Novokhopersky district, Voronezh oblast, in western Russia has affected 84 sheep and goats from farms totaling more than 500 animals, according to a vestivrn.ru report (computer translated). In addition, at least one farmworker has been infected. The farms have been quarantined. Inspectors of the Rosselkhoznadzor caution the public not to drink fresh milk or eat homemade cheese. [byline: Robert Herriman] -- communicated by: ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts [According to local media reports from 25 May 2017, this event in the Voronezh oblast involved sheep that were transported without authorisation by the veterinary authorities into the hitherto unaffected villages. The causative agent is most likely to have been _Brucella melitensis_. The numbers of human brucellosis cases in Russia, according to OIE data from 2014 and 2015, were, respectively, 369 and 393. - Mod.AS A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  .] [", "RABIES - AMERICAS (23): BRAZIL, VAMPIRE BAT, HUMAN EXPOSURE, FATAL ****************************************************************** A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Tue 30 May 2017 Source: The Sun [edited] A man has died, and more than 40 people are being treated for possible rabies exposure in north east Brazil, following an alarming spate of attacks by vampire bats. The death is the 1st recorded case of human rabies transmitted by a bat in Brazil since 2004. The outbreak is the largest wave of attacks ever registered in the region and is being attributed to a disturbing rise in the bat population nesting close to humans. On Saturday [27 May 2017], disease control teams from Bahia state health authority (SESAB) were out in force culling vampire bats by catching and applying a venom paste to their bodies, in a bid to control the rising numbers. The 46 year old man who died was milking a cow on a farm in Paramirim when he accidentally stepped on a rabies-carrying bat that bit his foot. Three weeks later, after being hospitalised for 7 days suffering from headaches, nausea, severe anxiety, and shortness of breath, he remembered the incident. He tested positive for rabies, but it was too late for doctors to administer the vaccine, and he passed away shortly afterwards in March this year [2017]. Within days of the fatality, residents living in the capital city, Salvador, some 400 miles from Paramirim, reported a flurry of attacks by the blood-thirsty creatures that appear to have added human blood to their menu. One of the victims, who lives in the historic centre of the city, said: \"I was bitten 3 times, twice on my toes and once on my heel, in 2 successive nights around the middle of May [2017]. I didn't realise until the 2nd time that I had been attacked by a bat. At first, I thought I had somehow cut my toe during the night. I normally sleep with the windows and doors open, and the bats flew in. I never felt any pain at all on both the nights I was bitten. But in my dreams, I did feel as if something had hooked itself onto my toe. When I woke up in the morning, I found the bed was wet. It had been raining overnight, and I thought water had dripped in. But it was my blood. It was such a shock.\" His mother, aged 54, said: \"I was bitten on my toe too while I slept. I didn't feel anything. My husband woke me up and showed me the dirty sheet. We thought I had cut myself without knowing. But as soon as my son told me the same thing had happened to him, we realised it had to be a bat because of the fang-like puncture marks in our toes.\" According to veterinarian Aroldo Carneiro, it's common for people to confuse bat bites with a simple cut. Carneiro, who heads the rabies surveillance unit, explained: \"The bite does not cause intense pain, because in bat saliva there are analgesic and anticoagulant substances, the latter prevents the quick healing of the wound.\" To combat the wave of attacks, a task force of disease control agents have been visiting homes in the terrorised neighbourhoods, advising residents on how to protect themselves at night. The teams have been vaccinating cats and dogs. Last year [2016], 91 000 dogs and 32 000 cats were immunised, and agents have been emphasizing to residents that rabies is almost always fatal unless victims receive early preventative treatment. -- communicated by: ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts [Cases of human rabies, including deaths, are frequently reported in the Amazon. There, several strains of the rabies virus circulate in the vampire bat, _Desmodus rotundus_. Recently, a new vampire bat species was reported to be another potential rabies vector, the hairy-legged vampire bat, _Diphylla ecaudata_. - Mod.PMB A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  .] [", "BACTERIAL BLACK SPOT, MANGO - GHANA: (BRONG-AHAFO) ************************************************** A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Sun 28 May 2017 Source: GhanaWeb [edited] Mango farms in Kintampo North [area of Brong-Ahafo] have been massively attacked by mango bacterial black spot disease, raising fears of poor harvest. The farmers say they do not have the financial strength to undertake mass spraying exercise. The area has become one of the major spots for mango plantation in Ghana. A total of 240 farmers are engaged in the cultivation of the grafted mangos covering 3000 acres. [A farmer] said his 90 acres [36 hectares], which used to produce at least 150 tonnes of mango, gave him less than 50 tonnes this [2016/17] season due to the disease. An economic assessment by the Agric Department at Kintampo in 2015 showed the cost of the fruit loss to farmers was estimated at [approximately 4.5 million USD] at the time. -- communicated by: ProMED-mail [Bacterial black spot (BBS, also called bacterial canker) of mango is caused by _Xanthomonas citri_ (previously _campestris_) pv. _mangiferaeindicae_. It was 1st described from Africa but is now known to occur also in the Asian-Pacific region and South America. It is an economically important disease with up to 90 per cent yield losses reported. The pathogen can infect leaves, stems, and fruit, with fruit symptoms being the most economically damaging. Symptoms include small, irregular or star shaped, water-soaked lesions on fruit, which soon become raised and may crack open releasing bacterial ooze. Stem lesions appear as blackened cankers, which may crack lengthwise. Leaves also show small water soaked lesions, which become angular and raised, increase in size and may coalesce to form large necrotic patches. Their appearance is characteristic and can be used to distinguish BBS from fungal anthracnose (_Glomerella_ or _Colletotrichum_ species) which forms flat, rounded lesions. Severe infections cause defoliation and/or premature fruit drop. The bacteria live as epiphytes but occur in high concentrations in leaf and stem lesions. They are essentially wound pathogens, but can also infect through natural openings. Incidence is increased by micro-wound development and may therefore be severe in windy areas without windbreaks, when insect populations are high, or in trees that lack vigour. BBS can be prevalent in both low and high rainfall tropical and subtropical areas. The disease is spread by wind-driven rain, splashing water, and mechanical means (including insect and human activities). Disease management is difficult and may include cultural practices, phytosanitary measures, use of clean planting and grafting material, and bacteriocidal sprays. Infected nursery trees have been a major source of BBS in new orchards. Susceptibility to BBS varies between mango cultivars, but no completely resistant varieties are known. Recently, the pathogen was also reported as the cause of black spot on cashew in Ghana's neighbor, Burkina Faso (ProMED-mail post http://promedmail.org/post/20160601.4255664). Maps Ghana: Ghana regions: Africa (overview): Pictures BBS fruit symptoms: BBS associated cankers: and Links Story also available at: BBS information (with pictures):  ,  ,  , via and _X. c._ pathovars, list and taxonomy:  .  - Mod.DHA A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  .] [", "CHOLERA, DIARRHEA AND DYSENTERY UPDATE (42): AFRICA *************************************************** A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases In this update: [1] Cholera - Congo DR [2] Cholera - Malawi (Southern Region) [3] Cholera - Sudan (White Nile) ****** [1] Cholera - Congo DR Date: Wed 31 May 2017 Source: UNICEF [edited] A cholera epidemic has been declared in Kinshasa and continues throughout the country. Cholera response in DRC will not succeed without support. Although the number of cholera cases has decreased significantly along the Congo River, the cholera epidemic in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (DRC) is not controlled yet, by far. Since the beginning of 2017, the DRC recorded 10 982 cases of cholera and 349 deaths have been recorded, an increase of more than 10 per cent compared with the situation in the same period in 2016. The DRC accounts for more than 98 per cent of all reported cholera cases in West and Central Africa. UNICEF calls on donors not to disengage from the cholera epidemic. The organization itself needs USD 2 million for its contribution to the fight against the epidemic. Cholera is endemic in many parts of the DRC, particularly in the east of the country. The province of Tanganyika, for instance, reported 2496 cases and 43 deaths during the month of May 2017. Transmission remains active in many health zones in Tanganyika. Population movements linked to the conflicts between Pygmies and Lubas worsen it by causing internal displacements to neighboring provinces, such as Maniema, Upper Katanga, Upper Lomami and South Kivu. The situation is also of concern in non-endemic areas in the north and west of the country. This epidemic affects several health zones in western DRC, particularly Kimpese in Central Kongo, with more than 600 cases reported from March to the present day. The province of Kinshasa also requires attention, as the Provincial Minister of Health declared an epidemic last [Fri 26 May 2017]. Several factors are aggravating the persistence of the cholera epidemic. These include the weak involvement of state structures in fighting against cholera, a lack of attention from the humanitarian and development community and other actors to this \"forgotten\" epidemic, as well as some funds that ended on [Fri 31 Mar 2017]. -- communicated by: ProMED-mail ****** [2] Cholera - Malawi (Southern Region) Date: Thu 1 Jun 2017 Source: Nyasa Times [edited] A cholera outbreak continues to hit hard areas around Nchalo in Chikwawa district as the number of infected people increases from 12 to 25. Last week [week 21-27 May 2017], there were reports that about 12 people were treated for suspected cholera cases at St Montfort Hospital in Nchalo. According to Chikwawa District Health Office spokesperson, Settie Piriminta, the outbreak has occurred because people from the villages of Sekeni and Allan in the area of Chief Lundu were drinking water from Nkombezi River which is contaminated. \"Lack of safe drinking water is the main factor which has caused the cholera outbreak at Sekeni and Allan Villages around Nchalo Trading Centre in the area of Chief Lundu,\" said the public relations officer. According to Piriminta, communities in the 2 areas have been fetching and drinking water from contaminated Nkombezi River because the villages have no functional boreholes and in most cases, when the boreholes start working they produce saline water. \"This forced people to drink water from the river which is also used for bathing and cleaning their household utensils. That aside, most communities in those areas do not have toilets and use the river to defecate consequently exposing themselves to water borne diseases,\" added Piriminta. Currently, the patients are receiving treatment at St Montfort Hospital where no cholera death has since been recorded. [byline: Steve Chirombo-Mana] -- communicated by: ProMED-mail ****** [3] Cholera - Sudan (White Nile) Date: Tue 30 May 2017 Source: News Agency of Nigeria [edited] Cases of cholera or in officialese, watery diarrhea in Sudan have increased in White Nile State with 75 deaths, and 4188 infections, the state's governor said [on Tue 30 May 2017]. \"The number of infection cases with cholera, since the disease's appearance on [Sat 8 Apr 2017], has reached 4188 cases, including 75 death cases,\" Abdul-Hameed Musa Kasha, governor of White Nile State, said when addressing the state's legislative council. Meanwhile, social media activists published photos and information, which said were authentic, on cases of cholera in some hospitals in the Sudanese capital Khartoum. The Sudanese health authorities have not yet published any indicators on the spread of the disease, its causes or the number of the people infected. Khartoum State's minister of health Mamoun Humaida, in a telephone conversation with Xinhua, declined to give any information about the disease. Sudan Tribune on [Tue 30 May 2017], reported the opposition Sudan Change Now Movement as saying that \"Sudan is witnessing a state of epidemiological spread of cholera in White Nile, Khartoum and North Kordofan States in addition to occasional cases in eastern Sudan.\" Meanwhile, Khartoum State's Health Ministry acknowledged presence of cholera cases in Khartoum, but refuted that the disease is cholera. \"All the cases admitted to the state's hospitals were watery diarrhea cases. There were 120 cases, where 49 of them have been treated and they are in good conditions. The conditions of the remaining patients are stable. We have registered 2 death cases during last month [April 2017],\" said the ministry in a statement on [Tue 30 May 2017]. \"We would like to reiterate that epidemic cholera does not exist among these cases, and the ministry has allotted 4 hospitals to receive the cases with qualified medical staff,\" it noted. \"We would like to reassure the citizens that these watery diarrhea cases do not represent cholera and the situation is now under control,\" added the statement. The watery diarrhea cases started in Sudan's White Nile State in April [2017] and then spread to neighboring states including Khartoum. During August and September 2016, watery diarrhea hit Sudan's Blue Nile and other states, leaving more than 55 dead with 2619 infection cases. -- communicated by: ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts [The mortality from cholera and most diarrheal illnesses is related to non-replacement of fluid and electrolytes from the diarrheal illness. As stated in Lutwick LI, Preis J, Choi P: Cholera. In: Chronic illness and disability: the pediatric gastrointestinal tract. Greydanus DE, Atay O, Merrick J (eds). NY: Nova Bioscience, 2017 (in press) oral rehydration therapy can be life-saving in outbreaks of cholera and other forms of diarrhea: \"As reviewed by Richard Guerrant et al (1), it was in 1831 that cholera treatment could be accomplished by intravenous replacement, and, although this therapy could produce dramatic improvements, not until 1960 was it 1st recognized that there was no true destruction of the intestinal mucosa, and gastrointestinal rehydration therapy could be effective, and the therapy could dramatically reduce the intravenous needs for rehydration. Indeed, that this rehydration could be just as effective given orally as through an orogastric tube (for example, refs 2 and 3) made it possible for oral rehydration therapy (ORT) to be used in rural remote areas and truly impact on the morbidity and mortality of cholera. Indeed, Guerrant et al (1) highlights the use of oral glucose-salt packets in war-torn Bangladeshi refugees, which reduced the mortality rate from 30 per cent to 3.6 per cent (4) and quotes sources referring to ORT as \"potentially the most important medical advance\" of the 20th century. A variety of formulations of ORT exist, generally glucose or rice powder-based, which contain a variety of micronutrients, especially zinc (5). \"The assessment of the degree of volume loss in those with diarrhea to approximate volume and fluid losses can be found in ref 6 below. Those with severe hypovolemia should be initially rehydrated intravenously with a fluid bolus of normal saline or Ringer's lactate solution of 20-30 ml/kg followed by 100 ml/kg in the 1st 4 hours and 100 ml/kg over the next 18 hours with regular reassessment. Those with lesser degrees of hypovolemia can be rehydrated orally with a glucose or rice-derived formula with up to 4 liters in the 1st 4 hours, and those with no hypovolemia can be given ORT after each liquid stool with frequent reevaluation.\" References ---------- 1. Guerrant RL, Carneiro-Filho BA, Dillingham RA. Cholera, diarrhea, and oral rehydration therapy: triumph and indictment. Clin Infect Dis. 2003;37(3):398-405. 2. Gregorio GV, Gonzales ML, Dans LF, Martinez EG. Polymer-based oral rehydration solution for treating acute watery diarrhoea. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2009;(2):CD006519. doi: 10.1002/14651858.CD006519.pub2. 3. Gore SM, Fontaine O, Pierce NF. Impact of rice based oral rehydration solution on stool output and duration of diarrhea: meta-analysis of 13 clinical trials. BMJ 1992; 304(6822): 287-91. 4. Mahalanabis D, Choudhuri AB, Bagchi NG, Bhattacharya AK, Simpson TW. Oral fluid therapy of cholera among Bangladesh refugees. Johns Hopkins Med. 1973; 132(4): 197-205. 5. Atia AN, Buchman AL. Oral rehydration solutions in non-cholera diarrhea: a review. Am J Gastroenterol. 2009; 104(10): 2596-604, doi: 10.1038/ajg.2009.329. 6. WHO. The treatment of diarrhea, a manual for physicians and other senior health workers. 4th ed. 2005. - Mod.LL A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  ,  ,  .] [", "FOODBORNE ILLNESS - PHILIPPINES (02): (MANILA REGION) PRISONERS, FATAL ********************************************************************** A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases [1] Date: Thu 1 Jun 2017 Source: Dulangan [edited] A total of 2 inmates of the New Bilibid Prison (NBP) died after they were hit with diarrhea due to suspected food poisoning over the weekend [27/28 May 2017]. As of [Thu 1 Jun 2017], there are 1212 diarrhea cases in Bilibid, according to an update by the Bureau of Corrections (BuCor). The 2 casualties are a 62 year old inmate who died of hypovolemic shock due to infectious diarrhea in the evening of [Tue 30 May 2017] and a 67 year old who died of diabetic coma early morning of [Wed 31 May 2017]. The Department of Health (DOH) has so far provided 1009 IV fluids and 50 000 aquatabs to the prison cells. BuCor director general B C de los Santos said they have provided financial assistance to the families of the inmates who passed. \"We assure the public that the outbreak is under control and well attended at the NBP hospital,\" De los Santos said. In an earlier interview, health secretary Paulyn Ubial said samples of the food the inmates ate over the weekend have been sent to the Research Institute for Tropical Medicine (RITM) for examination. \"We are looking if it's inherently the food or if it was because of the handling. We're also looking at the preparation area in Bilibid, there are some measures we can implement to mitigate or stop this from happening in the future,\" Ubial said on [Tue 30 May 2017]. Justice secretary Vitaliano Aguirre II personally inspected the inmates on [Mon 29 May 2017] and brought with him bananas and rehydration drinks \"to alleviate the conditions of the stricken inmates.\" Aguirre refused to speculate whether the food poisoning was deliberate. \"If there are persons or parties responsible for this then they should be held accountable,\" Aguirre said. [byline: Lian Buan] -- communicated by: ProMED-mail ****** [2] Date: Thu 1 Jun 2017 Source: EpiCore Global Surveillance Project [edited] A total of 203 cases were admitted at NBP General Hospital from 23-31 May 2017 due to loose bowel movement. Age ranged from 23-80 years old (median: 51). All were males. As of [Wed 31 May 2017], 160 cases were currently admitted. There were 2 deaths reported due to dehydration. -- communicated by: EpiCore Global Surveillance Project ****** [3] Date: Wed 31 May 2017 Source: EpiCore Global Surveillance Project [edited] The Field Epidemiology Training Program (FETP) fellows of the Department of Health (DOH) and health workers from Muntinlupa City have investigated the outbreak since [Mon 22 May 2017] and collected rectal swabs and stool samples from the cases. Water samples from point sources and faucets were also collected from the New Bilibid Prison and sent to the Research Institute for Tropical Medicine-DOH for bacteriological culture. Preliminary results are expected to be released today [Wed 31 May 2017] or tomorrow [Thu 1 Jun 2017]. -- communicated by: EpiCore Global Surveillance Project [ProMED-mail thanks EpiCore members for their contributions and await diagnostic studies. - Mod.LL A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  .] [", "TUBERCULOSIS - SYRIA: INTERNALLY DISPLACED PEOPLE ************************************************* A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Tue 30 May 2017 Source: The New Arab [in Arabic, trans. & summ. Mod.NS, edited] A medical source from the Syrian city of Hama revealed to The New Arab the presence of an increased number of cases of tuberculosis and the resulting deaths in both Hama and northern Syrian regions. The internal medicine doctor, Kamal Al-Taqi, confirmed that the increasing number of deaths due to tuberculosis is because of the increased resistance to the treatment. He added that most of the patients are children and elderly. Talal Al-Agha, an internal medicine doctor from Aleppo, indicated that \"a similar situation is occurring in Aleppo, where tuberculosis is very widespread in the settlements for the internally displaced persons (IDPs) and the poorer environments.\" He explained that \"we diagnose cases of the disease every day, mostly by doctors in the clinics belonging to the charities and the university hospital; both being free.\" He added that \"90 per cent of the cases live in crowded IDP shelters or collectives and do not have independent shelters,\" stressing that, \"we can only provide them with prescriptions and instructions.\" Al-Agha pointed out that \"tuberculosis was almost controlled in Syria, but it started to spread widely due to the poor health conditions in which millions of Syrians live today.\" He added that \"More seriously, dozens of patients fail to respond to treatment, which means the presence of resistance to antituberculosis drugs primarily rifampin, which is essential in treatment.\" Al-Agha stressed that \"we urgently need to conduct a study on these cases as the emergence of resistance presages a serious health disaster. To date, no entity has even counted the number of cases.\" Samir Al-Aktaa, a nurse working in a mobile clinic between Aleppo and Idlib countryside, said that \"over the past month [May 2017], we have transferred 12 suspected tuberculosis cases for investigations, including 3 children from one family in Al-Karama camp in Idlib countryside.\"Al-Aktaa added that\" more than 50 per cent of the children that we see are not vaccinated against tuberculosis. These include the children born in the besieged areas, unregistered infants who do not have vaccination books, and other children whose families have been distracted from their health needs by the woes of war.\" [byline: Lubna Salem] -- communicated by: ProMED-MENA [Tuberculosis is likely to spread in countries such as Syria, especially in times of war with displaced people. The post implies that part of the problem is anti-tubercular drug resistance. Resistance to anti-tubercular medications is amplified in circumstances where the medications are not taken properly and directly-observed therapy (DOT) can be quite effective in minimizing the development of resistance. It is not likely that DOT can be effective in the war-torn nation and it is also likely that microbiological confirmation of drug resistance is absent and drug availability may be spotty. - Mod.LL A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  .] [", "VIBRIO VULNIFICUS - USA (02): (MISSISSIPPI) ******************************************* A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Wed 31 May 2017 5:15 pm Source: WKRG [edited] A spokesperson for Singing River Hospital in Pascagoula, Mississippi confirms they've seen their 1st positive case of _Vibrio vulnificus_ this season. The organism is often referred to as the 'flesh-eating bacterium' because it can cause necrotizing wounds on the skin that can lead to amputation or in the most severe cases, loss of life. According to a close friend, the patient was fishing near Souix Bayou over the weekend when he accidentally stuck himself with a shrimp. Several hours later he was taken to the hospital with a high fever, pain, and swelling in his finger. Mark Bryant of the Mobile County Health Department said they haven't seen any water-related cases in Mobile County yet, only 2 minor food-related cases. [byline: Emily DeVoe] -- communicated by: ProMED-mail [The manifestations of _V. vulnificus_ in this case are noted and it is unclear if the patient had risk factors for more serious disease. There are 2 points to be emphasized: that vibrios are normal flora in warm saltwater (not indicative of any sewage contamination), and that most of the life-threatening illnesses occur in individuals with underlying medical illnesses, including immunocompromised states, chronic liver disease, and diabetes. So-called normal individuals often just get gastroenteritis. The range of disease due to _V. vulnificus_ can include more northern geographical areas if the area is affected by a substantial heat wave. - Mod.LL A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  .] [", "AVIAN INFLUENZA (106): NETHERLANDS, WILDFOWL, HPAI H5N5, OIE ************************************************************ A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Thu 1 Jun 2017 Source: OIE, WAHID (World Animal Health Information Database), weekly disease information 2017; 30(22) [edited] Highly pathogenic influenza A viruses (infection with) (non-poultry including wild birds), Netherlands ------------------------------------------------------------------- Information received on [and dated] 1 Jun 2017 from Dr Christianne Bruschke, chief veterinary officer, Ministry of Economic Affairs, The Hague, Netherlands Summary Report type: immediate notification Date of start of the event: 22 May 2017 Date of confirmation of the event: 30 May 2017 Reason for notification: reoccurrence of a listed disease Date of previous occurrence: 16 May 2017 Manifestation of disease: clinical disease Causal agent: highly pathogenic influenza A virus Serotype: H5N5 Nature of diagnosis: laboratory (advanced) This event pertains to a defined zone within the country. New outbreaks (1) Summary of outbreaks Total outbreaks: 1 Outbreak 1 (HPAI H5N5 2017-01): Utrecht, Utrecht Date of start of the outbreak: 22 May 2017 Outbreak status: continuing (or date resolved not provided) Epidemiological unit: village Total animals affected Species / Susceptible / Cases / Deaths / Killed and disposed of / Slaughtered Greylag Goose: _Anser anser_ (Anatidae) / - / 2 / 2 / 0 / 0 Epidemiology Source of the outbreak(s) or origin of infection: unknown or inconclusive Epidemiological comments: highly pathogenic influenza A H5N5 was confirmed in 2 wild geese (_Anser anser domesticus_) found in a district of the city of Utrecht. Control measures Measures applied: vaccination prohibited; no treatment of affected animals Measures to be applied: no other measures Diagnostic test results Laboratory name and type / Species / Test / Test date / Result Wageningen Bioveterinary Research, Lelystad (national laboratory) / Greylag Goose / polymerase chain reaction (PCR) / 30 May 2017 / Positive Future reporting The event is continuing. Weekly follow-up reports will be submitted. [The location of the outbreak can be seen on the interactive map included in the OIE report at the source URL above.] -- communicated by: ProMED-mail [As was mentioned in ProMED-mail posting http://promedmail.org/post/20170531.5074149, HPAI H5N5 was previously reported in the Netherlands in December 2016. See event summary report and map at  . - Mod.CRD A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  .] [", "POWASSAN VIRUS ENCEPHALITIS - USA (04): (MAINE) *********************************************** A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Wed 31 May 2017, 2:01 PM Source: Bangor Daily News (BDN) Maine [edited] Two residents of midcoast Maine are recovering from the Powassan virus, a rare but life-threatening illness spread by a tick bite. The Maine Center for Disease Control and Prevention said in a news release [Wed 31 May 2017], that it was notified of the 2 cases last week. The 2 adults became ill in late April [2017] and were hospitalized with encephalitis, or inflammation of the brain, caused by the virus. Both have since been discharged, the CDC said. The cases were confirmed through testing at the US CDC's division in Fort Collins, Colorado. Maine CDC did not release details about the individuals, including where in midcoast Maine they were infected or whether their cases were related. The 2 infections bring Maine's case count for Powassan to 9 since 2000. The virus claimed the life of a Rockland-area artist in late 2013. Powassan is only one of several diseases caused by ticks that are on the rise in Maine. Lyme disease, the most prevalent, rose to a record 1464 cases last year [2016]. Anaplasmosis, a bacterial infection that can lead to similar long-term effects as Lyme without a proper diagnosis, climbed dramatically as well. Powassan is spread by the bite of an infected deer or woodchuck tick and can cause fever, headache, vomiting, weakness, confusion and seizures. Brain swelling is a potentially devastating complication that kills 10 per cent of those who develop it, according to the CDC. About half of those who survive the infection suffer permanent neurological symptoms such as memory problems, facial tics and blurred vision. There is no vaccine or treatment other than keeping patients comfortable and hydrated during hospitalization. Many patients, on the other hand, experience no symptoms at all, according to the CDC. Symptoms can begin anytime from 1 week to 1 month after a tick bite. What makes Powassan particularly troubling -- in addition to the potentially debilitating symptoms -- is the speed of its transmission. While a tick must be attached for 36 to 48 hours to transmit Lyme disease, according to health officials, Powassan has been shown to spread from tick to human in under an hour. Maine researchers recently surveyed the state's ticks for Powassan, and found the virus largely in the southern part of the state, but also in Augusta and on Swan's Island in Hancock County. No Powassan was found east of Mount Desert Island or in northern Maine, though tickborne infections are known to move and spread. Powassan was 1st recognized in the town of Powassan, Ontario, in 1958. The illness is uncommon, with approximately 75 cases reported nationally over the last 10 years, primarily in the north east and Great Lakes regions, according to the CDC. But the number of cases has increased in recent years. \"Powassan, although rare, can be serious so it is important to be aware of your surroundings and take steps to avoid being bitten by ticks. Ticks are found in wooded and bushy areas so use caution if you go into these areas,\" state epidemiologist Dr Siiri Bennett said in the Maine CDC release. The CDC recommends the following tips to reduce the risk of disease spread by ticks: - choose light-colored clothing so it's easier to spot ticks; wear long sleeves and tuck your pants into your socks; - use an EPA-approved insect repellent; - check your skin and clothing for ticks and remove them promptly. Don't miss warm, moist areas such as the ears, armpits and neck, and have someone else check your back; - wash possible tick bites with soap and water and apply an antiseptic; - keep your lawn mowed and tidy to remove tick habitat; - if you spot an embedded tick, use a tick spoon or tweezers to grasp its mouth and pull it out with steady pressure. Don't use petroleum jelly, hot matches or nail polish remover, which can increase the risk of infection. [byline: Jackie Farwell] -- communicated by: ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts [The rapid transmission of this virus by its vector is discussed in: Hermance ME, Thangamani S: Powassan Virus. An emerging arbovirus of public health concern in North America. Vector Borne Zoonotic Dis. 2017 May 12. doi: 10.1089/vbz.2017.2110. [Epub ahead of print]  : \"The duration of _Ixodes scapularis_, the deer tick, attachment required for successful transmission of Powassan virus to a host was found to be as little as 15min by Ebel and Kramer (Ebel GD, Kramer LD. Short report: duration of tick attachment required for transmission of Powassan virus by deer ticks. Am J Trop Med Hyg 2004; 71: 268-271) in 2004. This \ufb01nding was particularly striking because unlike other tickborne pathogens (_Borrelia burgdorferi_, _Babesia microti_, and _Anaplasma phagocytophilum_), very little time between tick attachment and virus transmission is needed. The reactivation period required for some nonviral tickborne pathogens provides a grace period of approximately 24 hrs, where a minimal risk of transmission occurs if humans remove the attached tick within this timeline; however, there is no such grace period for Powassan virus due to its very short timeline of transmission. These differences underscore why the timeline of the virus' transmission must be carefully considered when analyzing the early immunomodulatory events that occur at the feeding site of the tick.\" - Mod.LL A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  .] [", "MENINGITIS, MENINGOCOCCAL - NIGERIA (09): FATAL, SEROGROUP C ************************************************************ A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Wed 31 May 2017 Source: Premium Times [edited] Nigeria has so far recorded a total of 1114 deaths in the 22 weeks of the cerebrospinal meningitis outbreak which hit the country in November 2016. A statement by Nigeria Centre for Disease Control stated that the outbreak, which has been ravaging the country for 22 weeks, has affected 4 additional local government areas bringing the total affected local governments to 226 compared to what was obtainable last month [April 2017]. Zamfara State recorded the 1st case of the latest meningitis outbreak and has recorded the highest casualty; followed by Sokoto, Kano, Katsina, Kebbi and Yobe, which have reached the alert/epidemic threshold. So far, a total of 14 005 suspected cases have been identified from 23 states and the Federal Capital Territory. Out of 901 samples sent for laboratory testing, 423 were confirmed positive for _Neisseria meningitidis_ while 309 tested samples showed the causative organism to be _Neisseria meningitidis_ serogroup C, with 8 per cent fatality rate from the disease. The health agency attributed the increase in the number of suspected cases to an increased knowledge of the case definition for the disease. Many health professionals at inception of the outbreak had missed the epidemiology of the disease when it 1st presented itself thereby making government intervention in providing vaccines to combat the spread of the disease late. According to the NCDC, the knowledge of the disease, however, does not translate to better outcome for the cases, as seen with the number of deaths recorded so far. The health agency said the case management, like other disease conditions, follows a sequence of case detection, laboratory confirmation, treatment using the preferred drug of choice and supportive care. \"At the onset of the outbreak, a large number of identified cases did not have samples taken for laboratory testing and were managed empirically. This may have been a contributory factor to the high number of deaths recorded. However, the Rapid Response Teams deployed to the most affected states supported sample collection and therefore an increase in laboratory confirmed cases,\" it said. The agency said in order to prevent future outbreak of the disease since meningococcal meningitis is a seasonal event of public health concern, there is a need for intensive and periodical community sensitisation on the disease and the need for early presentation and use of the public health facilities for immediate and Control (NCDC) alongside the National Primary Health Care Development Agency (NPHCDA) and other partner agencies have provided on-site support for case management in the worst affected states. [byline: Ayodamola Owoseye] -- communicated by: ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts [The outbreak of subtype C meningococcal meningitis is continuing in Nigeria and surrounding countries. Meningococcal meningitis is a bacterial disease caused by _Neisseria meningitidis_. Of the 13 subtypes or serogroups of the organism identified, 4 (A, B, C and W) are recognized to be the main causes of epidemics, while occasional outbreaks are also caused by X and Y. Meningococcal meningitis cases occur throughout the world. However, large, recurring epidemics affect an extensive region of sub-Saharan Africa known as the \"meningitis belt\" which comprises 26 countries from Senegal in the west to Ethiopia in the east. In this area, outbreaks occur during the dry \"epidemic\" season, usually covering the 1st half of the year. Before 2010, serogroup A was responsible for the large majority of epidemics in this area but serogroup C is now prominent, probably related to the use of the serogroup A vaccine. A map showing the belt can be seen at:  . - Mod.LL A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  .] [", "CLASSICAL SWINE FEVER - CHINA: NEW SUBGENOTYPE ********************************************** A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Wed 31 May 2017, 6:00 AM EDT Source: Farm Journal, Pork Network [edited] Reports from China say a new subgenotype of classical swine fever virus (CSFV) is responsible for recent outbreaks in that country, according to the Swine Health Information Center (SHIC). The Center reports that further results show specific antibodies elicited by vaccination of C-strain vaccine could not effectively protect against the new strains of CSF found in China, leading to the new cases. \"An article in the Veterinary Microbiology journal (2017; 201: 154-161) highlights an emerging disease issue occurring in China,\" said the article in the SHIC newsletter. \"For decades, CSF has been controlled in China due to extensive, mandatory vaccination with C-strain-based commercial vaccines. Recent frequent CSF outbreaks in this Asian nation have raised concern internationally and the Swine Health Information Center is monitoring developments closely.\" SHIC representatives say these discoveries create the need for additional studies, using field situations, to evaluate both the virus strains and vaccines to combat outbreaks. Read the entire paper on this subject from the Veterinary Microbiology journal [abstract; for the full paper, subscription required]. SHIC serves as an important vehicle to monitor swine pathogens on a global level and relay information on threats to the global herd. [byline: JoAnn Alumbaugh] -- communicated by: ProMED-mail [The addressed paper is: Luo Y, Ji S, Lei JL, et al. Efficacy evaluation of the C-strain-based vaccines against the subgenotype 2.1d classical swine fever virus emerging in China. Vet Microbiol. 2017;201:154-161. doi: 10.1016/j.vetmic.2017.01.012. Epub 2017 Jan 17. Abstract -------- \"Classical swine fever (CSF) is a devastating infectious disease of pigs caused by classical swine fever virus (CSFV). The disease has been controlled following extensive vaccination with the lapinized attenuated vaccine C-strain for decades in China. However, frequent CSF outbreaks occurred recently in a large number of C-strain-vaccinated pig farms in China and a new subgenotype 2.1d of CSFV has been reported to be responsible for the outbreaks. Here we analyzed the molecular variations and antigenic differences among the C-strain-based commercial vaccines of different origins from different manufacturers in China, and reevaluated the vaccines against the emerging subgenotype 2.1d strain of CSFV. The results showed that the C-strain adapted to the continuous ST cell line (CST) contain a unique M290K variation on the E2 protein, compared to those of primary BT cells (CBT) or rabbit origin (CRT) and the traditional Cstrain sequences available in the GenBank database. Serum neutralization test revealed the antigenic differences between CST and CBT or CRT. Notably, the neutralizing titers of porcine anti-C-strain sera against the CSFV isolate of subgenotype 2.1d were significantly lower than those against C-strain or Shimen strain. The C-strain-vaccinated, subgenotype 2.1d HLJZZ2014 strain-challenged pigs did not show any clinical signs and all survived. However, these pigs displayed mild pathological and histological lesions, and the CSFV viral RNA was detected in the various tissue and blood samples. Taken together, the C-strain-based vaccines of different origins showed molecular variations and antigenic differences, and could provide clinical but not pathological and virological protection against the subgenotype 2.1d CSFV emerging in China. Further investigation is needed to comprehensively assess the efficacy of C-strain of different doses against the subgenotype 2.1d CSFV.\" Classical swine fever (CSF), also known as hog cholera, is a contagious viral disease of pigs, including wild boar. The causative virus is a member of the genus _Pestivirus_ of the family _Flaviviridae_, and is closely related to the viruses of bovine viral diarrhoea and border disease. There is only one serotype of CSF virus (CSFV). For the chapter 2.8.3 \"Classical swine Fever\" in OIE's terrestrial Manual, adopted by the General Assembly in May 2014, please refer to  . - Mod.AS A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  .] [", "MERS-COV (30): SAUDI ARABIA (RIYADH, AL MADINAH, MAKKAH) ******************************************************** A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Wed 24 May 2017 Source: Saudi MOH 20-24 May 2017 [edited] As of 14:00 [2:00 PM] today [Thu 1 Jun 2017], there have been a total of: 1615 laboratory-confirmed cases of MERS-CoV infection, including 665 deaths [reported case fatality rate 41.2 per cent], 942 recoveries, and 8 currently active cases [As previously mentioned, the numbers of deaths, recoveries and currently active cases come from my spreadsheet tallies and differ from those listed on the Saudi MOH website. - Mod.MPP] Since the last ProMED-mail update [Wed 24 May 2017], there have been a total of: 3 newly confirmed cases 0 newly reported fatalities, and 6 newly reported recoveries. Information on newly confirmed cases (3 cases) Date: Thu 1 Jun 2017 (1 case) 1 - a 47 year old expat male, non-healthcare worker from Riyadh [Riyadh region] currently in a critical condition. Classified as a primary case with high risk exposure history in the 14 days preceding onset of illness currently under investigation. Date: Mon 29 May 2017 (1 case) 2 - a 60 year old Saudi male, non-healthcare worker from Madinah [Al Madinah region] currently in a stable condition. Classified as a primary case with high risk exposure history in the 14 days preceding onset of illness currently under investigation. Date: Thu 25 May 2017 (1 case) 3 - a 52 year old Saudi male, non-healthcare worker from Jeddah [Makkah region] currently in a critical condition. Classified as a primary case with a history of direct contact with camels in the 14 days preceding onset of illness. Information on newly confirmed recoveries (6 recoveries) Date: Tue 30 May 2017 (3 recoveries) 1 - a 64 year old Saudi male, non-healthcare worker from Hail [Hail region] with a history of pre-existing co-morbidities. [Reported as a newly confirmed case on 21 May 2017 at which time he was noted to be in a stable condition. Classified as a primary case with high risk exposure history in the 14 days preceding onset of illness currently under investigation. - Mod.MPP] 2 - a 33 year old expat male, healthcare worker from Riyadh [Riyadh region] with no history of co-morbidities. [Reported as a newly confirmed case on 15 May 2017 at which time he was noted to be in a stable condition, having been identified as an asymptomatic contact of a confirmed MERS-CoV infected individual. Classified as a secondary healthcare acquired case in a healthcare worker. - Mod.MPP] 3 - a 57 year old expat male, healthcare worker from Bisha [As\u012br region] with a history of pre-existing co-morbidities. [Reported as a newly confirmed case on 17 May 2017 at which time he was noted to be in a stable condition, having been identified as an asymptomatic contact of a confirmed MERS-CoV infected individual. Classified as a secondary healthcare acquired case in a healthcare worker. - Mod.MPP] Date: Mon 29 May 2017 (1 recovery) 4 - a 43 year old Saudi male, non-healthcare worker from Almudhannab [Al Qa\u1e63\u012bm region] with a history of pre-existing co-morbidities. [Reported as a newly confirmed case on 19 May 2017 at which time he was noted to be in a stable condition. Classified as a primary case with a history of direct contact with camels in the 14 days preceding onset of illness. - Mod.MPP] Date: Sun 28 May 2017 (1 recovery) 5 - a 38 year old expat male, non-healthcare worker from Riyadh [Riyadh region] with a history of pre-existing co-morbidities. [Reported as a newly confirmed case on 17 May 2017 at which time he was noted to be in a critical condition. Classified as a secondary healthcare acquired case in a patient. - Mod.MPP] Date: Sat 27 May 2017 (1 recovery) 6 - a 30 year old expat female, healthcare worker from Riyadh [Riyadh region] with no history of co-morbidities. [Reported as a newly confirmed case on 15 May 2017 at which time she was noted to be in a stable condition, having been identified as an asymptomatic contact of a confirmed MERS-CoV infected individual. Classified as a secondary healthcare acquired case in a healthcare worker. - Mod.MPP] -- communicated by: ProMED-mail [MERS-CoV infections continue to be diagnosed in Saudi Arabia. with a total of 1615 laboratory confirmed infections with MERS-CoV since reporting the 1st case in September 2012. These include 665 fatalities attributed to infection with the MERS-CoV with a reported case fatality rate of 41.2 per cent. During the month of May 2017, there were a total of 17 newly confirmed infections with MERS-CoV, 7 fatalities and 15 recoveries reported on the Saudi MOH MERS-CoV website. Of these 17 newly confirmed infections, 6 were classified as due to nosocomial transmission, 1 in Bisha (`As\u012br region) and 5 in Riyadh (Riyadh region), with 2 of these 6 occurring in patients (1 fatal) and 4 occurring in healthcare workers (all identified as asymptomatic contacts). Regions that reported newly confirmed infections in June 2017 included, Al Qa\u1e63\u012bm (2), Al Madinah (1), Ash Sharq\u012byah (1), `As\u012br (4), Hail (1), Makkah (1) and Riyadh (7). Maps showing the locations within Saudi Arabia reporting cases can be found at the source URLs. The interactive HealthMap/ProMED map of Saudi Arabia can be found at: . - Mod.MPP A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  .] [", "INVASIVE MOSQUITO - USA: (NEVADA, CONNECTICUT) ********************************************** A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases In this report: [1] _Aedes aegypti_ in Nevada [2] _Aedes albopictus_in Connecticut ****** [1] _Aedes aegypti_ in Nevada Date: Thu 1 Jun 2017 Source: 3 News [edited] A mosquito species known to spread Zika [virus] has been found in Southern Nevada. The Southern Nevada Health District's Vector Surveillance Program has identified _Aedes aegypti_ mosquitoes in the 89032 ZIP code area of Clark County. The identification was made on [Wed 31 May 2017]. This is the 1st time the mosquito has been detected in southern Nevada. Staff with the health district will begin conducting extensive surveillance to determine the scope of the aedes mosquito population in the area, while also providing nearby residents with breeding prevention information. If the health district discovers further evidence of breeding activity, they will consider appropriate control measures. According to the SNHD, the _Aedes aegypti_ mosquito is the main type of mosquito that spreads Zika, dengue, chikungunya, and other viruses. The species has also been identified in California and Arizona but mosquitoes in those states have not tested positive for the Zika virus. The mosquitoes identified in Clark County will be sent for Zika testing. _Aedes aegypti_ mosquitoes can become infected if they bite an infected person while he or she still has the virus in their blood. The mosquito then needs to live long enough to bite someone after the virus has had time to multiply in its system. \"We have conducted active surveillance for the aedes mosquito since 2014,\" said Dr Joe Iser, chief health officer of the Southern Nevada Health District. \"Detecting the mosquitoes early on, before there is local transmission of disease, will allow us to put our response plans in place and work with our community to implement preventive measures that eliminate breeding sources and help prevent the potential spread of the Zika virus and other diseases.\" The health district reported 22 cases of the Zika virus in Clark County residents in 2016, with 21 cases being travel-related and one case being sexually-transmitted. There has been one travel-related case of Zika in Clark County reported in 2017. To control mosquitoes in the area, residents should:  - check their yard weekly for water-filled containers or after every use of sprinklers;  - throw away or recycle water-holding containers that are not needed;  - if empty containers or large objects, such as boats or old appliances must be stored, they should be covered, turned over, or placed under a roof that does not allow them to fill with water;  - clean and scrub bird baths and pet-watering dishes weekly and dump the water from overflow dishes under potted plants and flower pots;  - fill tree holes and other cavities in plants with sand or soil;  - eliminate areas of standing water around their home, including non-circulating ponds, \"green\" swimming pools, and accumulated sprinkler runoff, which support mosquito breeding;  - check for hidden bodies of water such as wells, septic tanks, manholes, clogged drains, etc;  - call the health district to report mosquitoes. [byline: Jami Seymore] -- communicated by: ProMED-mail [The appearance of _Aedes aegypti_ in southern Nevada is not surprising, since it has been found in the adjoining states of Arizona and California. This mosquito is easily moved around and can become established in areas with favorable climate and habitats. Fortunately, screened and air conditioned buildings are barriers to its establishment and abundance. - Mod.TY] ****** [2] _Aedes albopictus_in Connecticut Date: Tue 30 May 2017 11:09 am Source: CT Post [edited] An invasive species of mosquito that can potentially transmit viruses like Zika and West Nile is spreading in Connecticut, according to a study by state researchers released last week [week of 21-27 May 2017]. A team of researchers from Connecticut's Agricultural Experiment Station in New Haven detected an increase in the number of Asian tiger mosquitoes [_Aedes albopictus_] along the south western coast of Connecticut. Single specimens were also occasionally seen in the less populated central part of the state. Last year [2016], researchers found more than 900 Asian tiger mosquitoes in 24 locations, a sharp increase from 2015 when 220 mosquitoes were collected from 10 sites. These mosquitoes, scientifically known as _Aedes albopictus_, are from East Asia where they're known to breed in jungle trees. They can spread serious diseases like chikungunya, dengue fever, Zika, and the West Nile virus, the researchers said. \"It's an aggressive human biter. It likes to feed on people and breeds in close association with humans,\" said Dr Philip Armstrong, a medical entomologist at CAES and the lead author of the study, published last week [week of 21-27 May 2017] in the journal PLoS Neglected Tropical Diseases [Philip M Armstrong, Theodore G Andreadis, John J Shepard, Michael C Thomas. Northern range expansion of the Asian tiger mosquito (Aedes albopictus): Analysis of mosquito data from Connecticut, USA. PLoS Negl Trop Dis. 2017; 11(5): e0005623. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pntd.0005623  ]. Researchers found that Connecticut temperatures are mild enough for the Asian tiger to survive the winter. Eggs and larvae have overwintered in the state, hatching in standing bodies of water around people's homes, Armstrong said. \"We're at the northern limit of the range of where it can survive,\" he said. \"If we continue to have mild winters, which we anticipate with climate change, we expect those populations to expand over time.\" Armstrong and his team have been monitoring the mosquitoes for 2 decades in nearly 100 locations around the state. Last year [2016], they found that some of the Connecticut mosquitoes carried 2 deadly viruses, Cache Valley and West Nile, posing a potential risk to humans. Asian tiger mosquitoes are mostly present in locations along the Connecticut shoreline, researchers said. The 1st specimens were found in 2006 in Fairfield County and have reemerged every summer since 2010. \"Because this mosquito will feed aggressively on humans, it clearly warrants further study and monitoring,\" Armstrong said. [byline: Sophia Tewa] -- communicated by: ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts [As temperatures warm, _Aedes albopictus_ will likely expand its range in North America. Although an avid human biter, unlike _Aedes aegypti_, it also feeds readily on other species that are not susceptible to Zika, chikungunya and dengue viruses, and except under unusual circumstances is less effective epidemiologically for human-to-human transmission of these viruses than is the _Ae. aegypti_ mosquito. This report has some very nice images of _Aedes albopictus_ mosquitoes available at the above URL. - Mod.TY] [ A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  ,  .] [", "SALMONELLOSIS - USA (04): LIVE POULTRY, MULTIPLE SEROTYPES ********************************************************** A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Thu 1 Jun 2017 2:45PM ET Source: Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) [edited] Multistate outbreaks of human salmonella infections linked to live poultry in backyard flocks, 2017 ------------------------------------------------------------------ CDC, many state departments of health and agriculture, and the United States Department of Agriculture's Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service are investigating 8 multistate outbreaks of human salmonellosis linked to contact with live poultry in backyard flocks. These outbreaks are caused by several kinds of salmonellae: _Salmonella [enterica_ serotype] Braenderup, _S._ Enteritidis, _S._ Hadar, _S._ I 4,[5],12:i-, _S._ Indiana, _S._ Infantis, _S._Mbandaka, and _S._ Typhimurium. As of 25 May 2017, 372 people infected with the outbreak strains of salmonella have been reported from 47 states. Illnesses started on dates ranging from 4 January 2017 to 13 May 2017. A total of 71 ill people have been hospitalized, and no deaths have been reported. 36 per cent of ill people are children younger than 5 years. Epidemiologic, traceback, and laboratory findings link the 8 outbreaks to contact with live poultry, such as chicks and ducklings, which come from several hatcheries. In interviews, 190 (83 per cent) of 228 ill people reported contact with live poultry in the week before illness started. People reported purchasing live baby poultry from several sources, including feed supply stores, websites, hatcheries, and from relatives. Contact with live poultry and the areas where they live and roam can make people sick with salmonella infections. Chicks, ducklings, and other live poultry that look healthy and clean can still carry salmonella. Outbreaks linked to contact with live poultry have increased in recent years as more people keep backyard flocks. In 2016, a record number of illnesses were linked to contact with backyard poultry. -- communicated by: ProMED-mail [Small animals such as chicks, ducklings, mice, and baby turtles are common vehicles for salmonellosis for 2 reasons: they are small enough to handle, and they carry salmonella. Two ways to minimize the risk: aggressive hand washing after contact and choosing other pets such as dogs or cats. - Mod.LL A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  .] [", "LEGIONELLOSIS - EUROPE: ex UNITED ARAB EMIRATES (DUBAI) ******************************************************* A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Sat 27 May 2017 Source: Outbreak News Today [edited] Legionnaires' disease cases up to 60 in Europe: linked to Dubai travel --------------------------------------------------------------- In recent months, there has been an increase in the number of cases of legionnaires' disease among European travelers returning from Dubai. As the source has not yet been identified, there could still be a risk for exposure to legionella for people visiting or living in Dubai. Between 1 Oct 2016 and 23 May 2017, 60 cases of legionnaires' disease with a history of travel to Dubai have been reported to the European Centres for Disease Prevention and Control (ECDC). The majority of cases stayed in commercial accommodation sites. The number of cases reported during February and April 2017 are still higher than in previous years. The most recent case became ill on 11 May 2017. These recent cases suggest there is still an ongoing exposure risk. The risk of legionnaires' disease to travelers to Dubai is considered to be low. However, the risk may be increased for the following groups: - those aged over 50; - those with underlying breathing problems; - those who have weakened immune systems; and - smokers. If you are travelling to Dubai, be aware of the symptoms of legionnaires' disease. If symptoms develop while in Dubai you should seek medical care. If symptoms develop within 2 weeks of returning home you should seek medical care and inform your healthcare provider of your travel history. Legionnaires' disease is a type of pneumonia caused by the bacterium _Legionella pneumophila_ and other _Legionella_ species. The illness usually starts with flu-like symptoms including fever, tiredness, headache, and muscle pains. This is followed by a dry cough and breathing difficulties which may progress to a severe pneumonia. The disease is spread through the air from a water source. People become infected when they breathe in aerosols (tiny droplets of water) which have been contaminated with the bacteria. -- communicated by: ProMED-mail [The last ProMED-mail post on these cases -- dated 30 Dec 2016 -- (Legionellosis - EU: EU travelers, ex United Arab Emirates (Dubai) susp http://promedmail.org/post/20161230.4733569) reported on 26 symptomatic cases in travelers from the European Union linked to Dubai. The following is a good review on the history of this infection, which came into the public view after an outbreak of pneumonia related to an American Legion convention at a hotel in Philadelphia during the summer of 1976. Winn WC Jr. Legionnaires disease: historical perspective. Clin Microbiol Rev. 1988; 1(1): 60-81;  . Abstract -------- In the summer of 1976, a mysterious epidemic of fatal respiratory disease in Philadelphia launched an intensive investigation that resulted in the definition of a new family of pathogenic bacteria, the _Legionellaceae_. In retrospect, members of the family had been isolated from clinical specimens as early as 1943. Unsolved epidemics of acute respiratory disease dating to the 1950s were subsequently attributed to the newly described pathogens. In the intervening years, the _Legionellaceae_ have been firmly established as important causes of sporadic and epidemic respiratory disease. The sources of the infecting bacteria are environmental, and geographic variation in the frequency of infection has been documented. Airborne dissemination of bacteria from cooling towers and evaporative condensers has been responsible for some epidemics, but potable water systems are perhaps more important sources. The mode of transmission from drinking water is unclear. The _Legionellaceae_ are Gram negative, facultative, intracellular pathogens. The resident alveolar macrophage, usually an effective antibacterial defense, is the primary site of growth. Cell-mediated immunity appears to be the most important immunological defense; the role of humoral immunity is less clear. - Mod.LL A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  .] [", "FOODBORNE ILLNESS - PHILIPPINES (03): (METROPOLITAN MANILA) PRISONERS, FATAL **************************************************************************** A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Fri 2 Jun 2017 Source: EpiCore Global Surveillance Project [edited] The Department of Health is investigating the possibility of cholera as the cause of the diarrhea due to contaminated water. BUCOR (Bureau of Corrections) sources mentioned that possibly the well water was contaminated by seepage of dirty water as the result of the onset of the rainy season. (As reported), 2 inmates died due to dehydration. Both were diabetic. The caterer denied that the food (milk fish) they served was the source of the diarrhea. -- communicated by: ProMED-mail [If cases continued to occur over a period of days beyond the incubation period of a point-source food-associated outbreak, the possibility of contaminated water becomes more significant. An epidemiologic curve showing cases over time could assist in this matter. Earlier postings have implied that diagnostic information would be available soon. Again, ProMED-mail thanks the EpiCore Global Surveillance Project member for this posting. - Mod.LL A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  .] [", "LEISHMANIASIS - COLOMBIA (02): (NORTE DE SANTANDER) VISCERAL, ALERT ******************************************************************* A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Wed 31 May 2017 Source: Caracol Radio [in Spanish, trans. Sr.Tech.Ed.MJ, edited] An emergency situation is occurring in the village of Vetas, municipality of Tib\u00fa [Norte de Santander department] because of an outbreak of leishmaniasis, which has affected 56 people, including 10 Venezuelans and some pregnant women. Maribel Trujillo, manager of the Tib\u00fa Hospital, said that so far no resources or a source of funding have been allocated for the treatment of Venezuelans who cross the border and reach this locality in the Catatumbo area. \"The medical consultations that we are carrying out continue without any coverage and the situation is becoming more critical every day with the outbreak of leishmaniasis, which incudes 10 cases in Venezuelans and some pregnant women. In total for the outbreak, we already have 56 people affected, but we think there may be more Venezuelans in that group, since they are crossing the border looking for work.\" The department's health authorities are conducting a review of the emergency in order to carry out a census in the rural area of the municipality. -- communicated by: ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts [Around 99 per cent of all leishmaniasis cases in Colombia are CL (cutaneous leishmaniasis); 0.4 per cent are MCL (mucocutaneous leishmaniasis), and 0.3 per cent are VL (visceral leishmaniasis). Leishmaniasis is especially common in sylvatic foci and in the inter-Andean valleys, where working on coffee plantations is a risk factor. Epidemic outbreaks of CL caused by _L. braziliensis_, _L. guyanensis_, and _L. panamensis_, have been reported since 1984. Urbanization of the disease has been observed in recent years (Alvat J et al: Leishmaniasis worldwide and global estimates of its incidence. PLoS One. 2012; 7(5): e35671. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0035671;  ). - Mod.EP Maps of Colombia can be seen at and . - Sr.Tech.Ed.MJ] [", "CHOLERA, DIARRHEA AND DYSENTERY UPDATE (43): AFRICA *************************************************** A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases In this update: Africa [1], [2] Cholera - Sudan [3] Cholera - Sudan (Khartoum) travel warning [4] Cholera - Somalia (Lower Shabelle) military [5] Cholera - Nigeria (Kwara State) ****** [1] Cholera - Sudan Date: Fri 2 Jun 2017 15:26:17 Source: Xin Hua Net [edited] Sudanese health minister Bahar Idris Abu Garada, on [Fri 2 Jun 2017], said that watery diarrhea has killed 265 people and infected 16 121 others in 11 states of Sudan since August 2016. In a report to the Sudanese parliament, the minister warned against increase of watery diarrhea infections and deterioration of the health conditions, saying \"we expect the worse with the rainy season.\" According to the minister's report, Sudan's White Nile State registered the highest rate of infection with the disease that reached 4512 cases, attributing that to the fact that the state is neighboring South Sudan. Blue Nile State comes 2nd with 4471 infections and 12 deaths, followed by Sinnar State with 2401 infections and 14 deaths, according to the report. Khartoum State has registered 19 death cases and 878 infections within 10 months, it said. The Red Sea State registered 1137 infections and 19 death cases, while the Gezira State registered 55 deaths and 982 infections. The minister called for strengthening supervision of the Nile water sources and revising the water networks to ensure provision of clean water for the affected areas. Contaminated drinking water is responsible for the spread of the disease which appears every now and then in many areas in Sudan. During August and September 2016, watery diarrhea hit Sudan's Blue Nile and other states, leaving more than 55 dead with 2619 infection cases. -- communicated by: ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts ****** [2] Cholera - Sudan Date: Thu 1 Jun 2017 Source: Radio Dabanga [edited] On [Tue 30 May 2017], Khartoum state saw the death of 2 people from cholera and infection of 120 others amid medical concerns over the spread of the potentially fatal disease to the residents of the national capital. At least 75 people have died of cholera and more than 4000 have been infected in the White Nile state since the disease hit the state last month [April 2017], the state's governor Abdelhameed Mousa Kasha announced on [Wed 31 May 2017]. The disease also has spread to the state of River Nile where a child and an elderly person died and 57 others were infected in El Matamma locality according to a locality commissioner. Yesterday, [Wed 31 May 2017], Abdelrahman El Siddig, the head of civil society organizations in White Nile state, told Radio Dabanga from El Gezira Aba that 19 new cases have been recorded in the medical isolation centres in Asalaya, El Gezira Aba, Rabak, Um Barad, El Mahla, El Hubari east of Rabak. El Obeid Cholera has spread again in El Obeid in North Kordofan after decrease during the last period. Yesterday, [wed 31 May 2017], Dr Amer Adam, the deputy specialist in family medicine and the head of the doctors committee at El Obeid Hospital told Radio Dabanga that 7 new cases of the disease were reported at El Sahwa district north of El Obeid. He told Radio Dabanga that the isolation centre of El Obeid Hospital has continued to receive new cases of the disease every day. He pointed to the movement of a team from the Ministry of Health to El Sahwa district north of El Obeid to identify the causes of the spread of the disease. Dr Adam called on people to clean vegetables well before eating, care about hygiene and washing hands before eating, drink clean water, and keep their children away from dumpsters. Abu Jubeiha One person died and another was infected with cholera in the rural areas of Abu Jubeiha in South Kordofan state this week [week of 28 May-3 June 2017]. Activists and health care workers told Radio Dabanga that 2 cases were taken to Ibrahim Malik Hospital in Khartoum and said one of them died while the other was recovering. A worker in the sector confirmed that the locality health authorities issued a decision to chlorinate drinking water at the city's stations while prohibiting the sale of open foods in the market. He said the locality security committee has set up a plan to combat the spread of cholera in Abu Jubeiha in South Kordofan. Epidemic The Sudanese health authorities still refer to \"watery diarrhea\" cases, though Sudanese medics have confirmed that the disease concerns cholera. Cholera \"seems to be a stigma for the government\", a UK-based Sudanese specialist told Radio Dabanga in January 2017. \"Yet raising the awareness among communities about preventing cholera is crucial to containing a cholera outbreak.\" In April 2017, a journalist was detained in eastern Sudan for reporting about cholera. -- communicated by: ProMED-mail ****** [3] Cholera - Sudan (Khartoum) travel warning Date: Thu 1 Jun 2017 Source: Sudan Tribune [edited] The American Embassy in Sudan [Thu 1 Jun 2017], has warned its American nationals against a cholera outbreak in the east African country including its capital Khartoum. \"The embassy in Khartoum informs American citizens that there are confirmed reports of cholera cases in some areas of Sudan, including the greater Khartoum metropolitan area that has resulted in fatalities\" said a statement released by the embassy. Khartoum's state health minister, Mamoun Hamida, confirmed in a press statement on [Tue 30 May 2017] 120 cases of watery diarrhea in the Sudanese capital, killing 2 people. Sudanese authorities describe the waterborne disease as \"acute watery diarrhea\", avoiding [the word] cholera. \"This is a reminder to follow hand hygiene practices, and to consume safe food and water,\" said the embassy, adding \"Those who will be far away from medical care should travel with oral rehydration salts (ORS) - at least 3 sachets - and water purification tablets or other devices for clean water\". In a report to the Sudanese parliament about the health situation in the country [Thu 1 Jun 2017], health minister Bahr Idriss Abu Garda said there are over 14 000 water-related cases, adding the disease killed 272 since the spread of the outbreak in August 2016 in 10 states. The minister stressed that the contaminated drinking water has been behind the spread of the disease. -- communicated by: ProMED-mail ****** [4] Cholera - Somalia (Lower Shabelle) military Date: Thu 1 Jun 2017 Source: Dalsan Radio [edited] Somalia National Army soldiers based in Balidoogle have demanded for an immediate health and sanitation operation after 2 of their colleagues died from cholera. At least 50 SNA soldiers have been admitted at a local hospital with cholera symptoms according to several military officers who spoke to Radio Dalsan on condition of anonymity. \"We are in need of a quick intervention in this matter. We fear many will die of cholera if help does not come soon\" one military official told Radio Dalsan. Some 5000 SNA soldiers are based at the camp, a large number, which has caused congestion at the base in Lower Shabelle. The number of soldiers at the camp rose following a decree that all SNA soldiers move out of Mogadishu. Prime minister Hassan Khayre had visited the camp 3 days before to boost the soldier's morale in the fight against militant group Alshabaab. Cholera has recently killed more than 400 Somalis mostly in regions much hit by the just-ended drought. -- communicated by: ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts ****** [5] Cholera - Nigeria (Kwara State) Date: Fri 2 Jun 2017 Source: Nigerian Tribune [edited] As cases of cholera outbreak have been discovered in Ilorin, the capital of Kwara State, the state government said that it has put in place measures to contain the spread of the disease in the state. Speaking with journalists during on the spot assessment to health facilities in Ilorin on [Fri 2 Jun 2017], the secretary to the state government, Alhaji Isiaka Gold, who led the government's delegation to assess the outbreak said the government had deployed resources to ensure that cholera did not spread in the state. The secretary to the state government said the government had begun sensitization of the public on the need for personal hygiene and environmental sanitation, saying that the government had supported hospitals with necessary drugs to handle the case promptly. Also speaking, the state commissioner for health, Alhaji Atolagbe Alege, said the Ministry had deployed both human and material resources needed to contain the outbreak. [byline: Biola Azeez] -- communicated by: ProMED-mail [The mortality from cholera and most diarrheal illnesses is related to non-replacement of fluid and electrolytes from the diarrheal illness. As stated in Lutwick LI, Preis J, Choi P: Cholera. In: Chronic illness and disability: the pediatric gastrointestinal tract. Greydanus DE, Atay O, Merrick J (eds). NY: Nova Bioscience, 2017 (in press) oral rehydration therapy can be life-saving in outbreaks of cholera and other forms of diarrhea: \"As reviewed by Richard Guerrant et al (1), it was in 1831 that cholera treatment could be accomplished by intravenous replacement, and, although this therapy could produce dramatic improvements, not until 1960 was it 1st recognized that there was no true destruction of the intestinal mucosa, and gastrointestinal rehydration therapy could be effective, and the therapy could dramatically reduce the intravenous needs for rehydration. Indeed, that this rehydration could be just as effective given orally as through an orogastric tube (for example, refs 2 and 3) made it possible for oral rehydration therapy (ORT) to be used in rural remote areas and truly impact on the morbidity and mortality of cholera. Indeed, Guerrant et al (1) highlights the use of oral glucose-salt packets in war-torn Bangladeshi refugees, which reduced the mortality rate from 30 per cent to 3.6 per cent (4) and quotes sources referring to ORT as \"potentially the most important medical advance\" of the 20th century. A variety of formulations of ORT exist, generally glucose or rice powder-based, which contain a variety of micronutrients, especially zinc (5). \"The assessment of the degree of volume loss in those with diarrhea to approximate volume and fluid losses can be found in ref 6 below. Those with severe hypovolemia should be initially rehydrated intravenously with a fluid bolus of normal saline or Ringer's lactate solution of 20-30 ml/kg followed by 100 ml/kg in the 1st 4 hours and 100 ml/kg over the next 18 hours with regular reassessment. Those with lesser degrees of hypovolemia can be rehydrated orally with a glucose or rice-derived formula with up to 4 liters in the 1st 4 hours, and those with no hypovolemia can be given ORT after each liquid stool with frequent reevaluation.\" References ---------- 1. Guerrant RL, Carneiro-Filho BA, Dillingham RA. Cholera, diarrhea, and oral rehydration therapy: triumph and indictment. Clin Infect Dis. 2003;37(3):398-405. 2. Gregorio GV, Gonzales ML, Dans LF, Martinez EG. Polymer-based oral rehydration solution for treating acute watery diarrhoea. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2009;(2):CD006519. doi: 10.1002/14651858.CD006519.pub2. 3. Gore SM, Fontaine O, Pierce NF. Impact of rice based oral rehydration solution on stool output and duration of diarrhea: meta-analysis of 13 clinical trials. BMJ 1992; 304(6822): 287-91. 4. Mahalanabis D, Choudhuri AB, Bagchi NG, Bhattacharya AK, Simpson TW. Oral fluid therapy of cholera among Bangladesh refugees. Johns Hopkins Med. 1973; 132(4): 197-205. 5. Atia AN, Buchman AL. Oral rehydration solutions in non-cholera diarrhea: a review. Am J Gastroenterol. 2009; 104(10): 2596-604, doi: 10.1038/ajg.2009.329. 6. WHO. The treatment of diarrhea, a manual for physicians and other senior health workers. 4th ed. 2005. - Mod.LL A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  ,  ,  .] [", "AVIAN INFLUENZA (107): EUROPE (LUXEMBOURG) POULTRY ************************************************** A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Fri 2 Jun 2017 17:34 Source: Luxemburger Wort [edited] A bird flu outbreak has been confirmed at 3 poultry farms in Luxembourg. The virus was detected at farms in Keispelt, Niederfeulen and Schrassig. To limit the spread of the disease to other farms, the transport of live poultry has been banned for a week. Luxembourg's Ministry of Agriculture, Viticulture and Consumer Protection said farmers should report all abnormal poultry deaths immediately to a vet. It also recommended that poultry be kept indoors, and be fed and watered inside a building. The ministry took pains to emphasize that bird flu cannot affect humans, and said it was safe to eat poultry meat and eggs. [byline: Heledd Pritchard] -- communicated by Nati Elkin [According to Luxembourg's reports to the OIE (updated 2015), highly pathogenic avian influenza has not been reported from this country since 1956. Remarkably, several serotypes of the virus have been repeatedly reported, throughout the years and up to 2017, from all of Luxembourg's neighboring countries (Belgium, France, and Germany) as well as from another Benelux country, the Netherlands. Official confirmation of the outbreak, details including serotype, and a formal notification to the OIE are anticipated. - Mod.AS A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  .] [", "MUMPS UPDATE (19): EUROPE (UK), USA (HAWAII, PENNSYLVANIA, CALIFORNIA) ********************************************************************** A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases In this update: Europe --- [1] UK (England, Oxford) USA --- [2] Hawaii [3] Pennsylvania, Pennsylvania State University [4] California, Los Angeles county ****** Europe --- [1] UK (England, Oxford) Date: Fri 26 May 2017 Source: Cherwell [edited] An outbreak of mumps has left students sent home, cricket games cancelled, and preliminary and final exams under threat as students across Oxford come down with the infection. Cherwell has learned that major outbreaks have occurred at Exeter, Corpus Christi and St Anne's colleges, with as many as several dozen students falling ill across the entire university. It is possible that the infection, an airbourne virus transmitted through coughing or sneezing, was spread at recent college balls. In serious cases, it can cause deafness and meningitis. Four Anne's students have reportedly been confined to their rooms, while 2 have been sent home to recover in quarantine. At Corpus, at least 3 students are affected, all of whom have either been asked to remain in their rooms or go to home for a brief period. JC is a 2nd year mathematician at Corpus who has contracted mumps and is sitting exams this term. Speaking to Cherwell, he said: \"How I got mumps is a mystery, as the incubation time is between 2--3 weeks.\" Although the \"the college has been supportive and useful\" by rearranging tutorials and relaxing deadlines, he said, he is concerned about upcoming examinations. He added that he \"can't really work, and as it's a viral infection, you can only treat the symptoms.\" A post on the Corpus Christi College Cricket Club Facebook page announced that the St Anne's side had had to concede this week's scheduled match \"[D]ue to an outbreak of mumps and food poisoning.\" According to JB, a 2nd year at Corpus, feeling in college was relatively jovial. He told Cherwell: \"Oddly enough people really don't seem to be that worried about it at all. It's more of a cause for humour than a genuine cause for concern.\" Speaking exclusively to Cherwell, St Anne's JCR [junior common room] president Pranay Shah said: \"'The mumps outbreak around a few Oxford colleges is a pretty terrible coincidence with finals, prelims and other exams for the majority of students, but the response from staff has been very helpful. As well as warning people of the [infection] methods and symptoms, advice from the NHS [National Health Service] and college nurse has been provided too.\" One student who has contracted mumps told Cherwell: \"The 1st I heard about it, someone I knew caught it and had been shipped home. \"Then one evening I got sharp pains in the corner of my jaw which were pretty uncomfortable but I didn't think much of it. Overnight, I was pretty feverish. I woke up the next day with my face all swollen up on the right hand side. I went to the doctor who confirmed it was mumps, so College told me to stay in my room in quarantine or go home. \"College have been pretty good about it -- they moved me to a room with en-suite so I could be a bit more comfortable, and the nurse has been around to check on me, but I'm not allowed to use kitchens or communal bathrooms. The first couple of days of infection were pretty grim, I was really weak, walking to Jericho meant I had to sleep for almost the rest of the day, and everything ached. I had dizziness, headaches and a high temperature, and a large swelling around the back of my jawbone.\" Both the Oxford University health guidelines and NHS website recommend that people entering higher education for the 1st time have the MMR (measles, mumps and rubella) vaccine. In 2010, a similar outbreak saw 41 students contract mumps. Students with symptoms are advised to seek medical assistance. [byline: Felix Pope] -- communicated by: ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts [A map of the United Kingdom can be found at  ] ****** USA --- [2] Hawaii Date: Fri 2 Jun 2017 8:27 am Source: SFGate [edited] Hawaii officials are urging all residents born in or after 1957 to get a mumps vaccination if they haven't already done so. The state Health Department announced [Thu 1 Jun 2017] that 16 additional people have mumps, which brings the state's yearly total to 81 cases. The total is more than double the number of cases in the last 10 years combined, Hawaii News Now reported ( ). The state had just 10 mumps cases last year [2016], 4 in 2015 and one in 2014. Anyone without evidence of immunity to mumps should receive at least one vaccine dose, health department officials said. -- communicated by: ProMED-mail [Hawaii is following the same trend of increased mumps activity seen in the continental US. - Mod.LK] ****** [3] Pennsylvania, Pennsylvania State University Date: Wed 31 May 2017 Source: Contagion Live [edited] Pennsylvania State University (Penn State) has reported that the mumps outbreak that started in late January 2017 had reached 77 cases in April [2017]. More recently, a local Pennsylvania news outlet, Lancaster Online, reported that, as of 15 May [2017], the case count had reached 86. Although a majority of those who were infected during the ongoing outbreak have recovered, new cases are continuously popping up around campus. In addition, the University Health Services (UHS) urges all those who present with mumps-like signs and symptoms not attend large social functions, so as to control the spread of the outbreak. The UHS also recommends all who have come in close contact with infected individuals \"avoid large social activities, especially where food or drinks are shared or where the virus can be passed through saliva exposure, even if they are not showing symptoms,\" since symptoms usually arise around 16 days after exposure. Infected individuals usually present with \"puffy cheeks and a swollen jaw,\" due to swelling of the salivary glands. Other symptoms include fever, muscle ache, headache, and loss of appetite. According to the Penn State's immunization recommendations, most students, including those living on and off campus, whether they are new, returning, or transfer students, are expected to receive 2 doses of the measles, mumps and rubella (MMR) vaccine, or submit results from a blood test proving immunity, as recommended by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). Students exempt from this requirement include exchange students, non-degree-seeking students, World Campus students, and those CDC recommends not to receive the vaccine, including pregnant women, anyone with previous allergies to the vaccine, and anyone with life-threatening allergy against neomycin. In addition, the CDC recommends individuals with certain chronic diseases inform their physician of their conditions prior to receiving vaccination. A Penn State press release reports that \"most of the confirmed mumps cases are in students who received the CDC-recommended 2 doses of MMR vaccine;\" however, UHS still recommends those who have not received the vaccine or who are not immune to mumps - through previous infection - schedule an appointment with UHS or their primary care physician to be vaccinated \"immediately.\" Commenting on the ongoing outbreak at Penn State, Shelley Haffner, infectious disease manager at UHS, said, \"While many students who contracted mumps earlier this semester are no longer infectious, we are still continuing to see several new cases each week on campus... It is important that everyone take steps not only to protect themselves from possible exposure, but also to prevent exposing others should they develop symptoms.\" In light of this ongoing outbreak, Penn State will \"exclude\" anyone who does not provide proof of immunity from campus for the duration of 26 days if they have come in contact with an infected individual. Individuals who have presented with mumps-like symptoms have been placed in isolation based on protocols and recommendations from the CDC and the Pennsylvania Department of Health. In addition, several students have left campus \"during the infectious phase of the illness.\" UHS has reached out to individuals who may have contracted infection and have already taken necessary steps to exclude those who have been identified as contacts of confirmed cases from the university campus. [byline: Sarah Anwar] -- communicated by: ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts [A map of the United States can be found at  ] ****** [4] California, Los Angeles County Date: Thu 1 June 2017 4:57 PM PDT Source: Los Angeles Daily News [edited] More than 40 people in Los Angeles County and surrounding regions have been diagnosed with mumps, prompting public health officials [Thu 1 Jun 2017] to declare an outbreak and issue an alert to physicians and providers to be aware of it. In the alert, public health officials said many of the cases were initially misdiagnosed and there was a reliance of using false negative results. It's unclear when this occurred. Health officials also did not release the conditions of those who were diagnosed. A response from Los Angeles County public health officials was not immediately forthcoming [Thu 1 Jun 2017]. But health officials said most of the patients are men who have sex with men, and the majority of the cases were linked to patients being at large venues such as gyms, bars, theaters and nightclubs. Some of the patients are women and heterosexual men who have social connections to men who have sex with men, health officials noted. \"The majority of cases have had no documentation of complete vaccination; however, some cases were fully vaccinated,\" according to the alert. Mumps is highly infectious and spreads among those living in close quarters or at social settings. In March [2017], 7 men in LA County were diagnosed with mumps as part of 2 different clusters and occurred in men who have sex with men. It was unclear if those cases were related to the recent outbreak. \"A major factor contributing to outbreaks of mumps is being in a crowded environment,\" according to the alert. \"Also, certain behaviors that result in exchanging saliva, such as kissing or sharing utensils, cups, lipstick or cigarettes, may increase the spread of the virus.\" Symptoms include fatigue, body aches, headache, loss of appetite, a low-grade fever and swelling of the salivary glands, according to health experts. In adult men, mumps can sometimes lead to sterility. Nationwide, 2570 people have been diagnosed with mumps from January to April of this year [2017], according to the federal CDC. The agency reports that mumps is no longer common in the United States, but some outbreaks have been reported. Last year [2016], there were 5833 cases. \"Before the US mumps vaccination program started in 1967, about 186 000 cases were reported each year, but the actual number of cases was likely much higher due to underreporting,\" according to CDC. \"Since the pre-vaccine era, there has been more than 99 per cent decrease in mumps cases in the United States.\" Mumps patients are contagious from 2 days before through 5 days after onset, according to CDC. Public health officials said routine vaccination is the most effective way to prevent the disease. California requires that all children entering kindergarten receive 2 doses of the MMR vaccine. As of 1 July 2016, only children with medical proof can be exempt. [byline: Susan Abram] -- communicated by: ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts [ A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  .] [", "MEASLES UPDATE (30) ******************* A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases In this update: [1] South Sudan [2] Romania [3] Canada (Nova Scotia) ****** [1] South Sudan Date: Fri 2 June 2017 7:57 AM Source: Brandon Sun [edited] A total of 15 young children have died in a botched measles vaccination campaign that saw people as young as 12 years old administering the vaccines, South Sudan's government announced [on Fri 2 Jun 2017]. The United Nations said the children died of \"severe sepsis/toxicity\" from the contaminated vaccine, and the health ministry blamed the deaths on human error. One syringe was used for all the children during the 4-day campaign, and the vaccine was stored without refrigeration the entire time. Measles is yet another challenge facing the desperately poor East African country that already has been devastated by more than 3 years of civil war and a recently declared famine, as well as a cholera outbreak. The government said all of the children who died were under the age of 5. It is setting up a commission to determine who is responsible and whether victims' families will be compensated. The measles vaccination campaign is targeting more than 2 million children across the country. About 300 children were targeted in the area where the children's deaths occurred. The children died in the rural town of Kapoeta in early May [2017]. Another 32 children suffered fever, vomiting and diarrhea but recovered, a joint statement by the World Health Organization and the UN children's agency UNICEF said. Abdulmumini Usman, the South Sudan country director for WHO, told The Associated Press earlier this week [week of 28 May-3 Jun 2017] that even after the organization became aware of the deaths, the measles campaign continued across the country except in Kapoeta. \"This campaign is lifesaving,\" Usman said. WHO provides some training to South Sudan's health officials and the UN children's agency provides the vaccines to the government. It was not immediately clear whether any UN officials were present at the time of the botched vaccinations. The joint statement by WHO and UNICEF said the vaccination team involved in the deaths was \"neither qualified nor trained.\" It called the deaths a \"tragic event\". Dr Samson Baba, an immunization official in the Ministry of Health, refused to comment on the deaths earlier this week [week of 28 May-3 Jun 2017], instead demanding the source of the information. South Sudan's government on [Fri 2 Jun 2017] also said vaccinations are not being denied to any part of the country, including those held by opposition forces. The civil war has killed tens of thousands and sent more than 1.8 million people fleeing the country, creating the world's fastest-growing refugee crisis. In 2016, South Sudan had at least 2294 measles cases and 28 people died, according to UN data. So far this year [2017], at least one person has died and 665 people have been infected. Friday's UN statement said the risk of measles in the country remains \"extremely high\". [byline: Justin Lynch and Sam Mednick] -- communicated by: ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts [This is an unfortunate setback to the vaccination campaign and tragic loss of children's lives in this troubled country that desperately needs improved child health, although it is impressive that more than 2 million children are being targeted in this campaign. Why untrained individuals were giving the vaccinations is not clear; the 2 infractions, lack of refrigeration and repeated use of needles, are likely a result of ignorance of proper procedures. Thus education of health care workers is imperative. [A map of South Sudan can be found at  . - Mod.LK] ****** [2] Romania Date: Tue 30 May 2017 Source: Outbreak News Today [edited] In a follow-up on the large measles outbreak in Romania, the National Center for Surveillance and Control of Communicable Diseases (computer translated) puts the outbreak case count at 6434 confirmed cases since last September [2016]. The number of measles-related fatalities is confirmed at 26, with a 27th possible death still being investigated in Dolj. The breakdown of measles deaths by county is as follows: Timis (8), Arad (5), Dolj (5), Caras Severin (3), and one each in Bihar, Calarasi, Satu Mare, Vaslui and Bucharest. Measles vaccination status is at the heart of the epidemic problem in Romania. According to a Digi 24 report (computer translated), 7 per cent of parents refuse vaccination, and one in 3 families are unable to reach the doctor or get the vaccine. In the past 10 years, the immunization rate in Romania has dropped from 95 per cent to 86 per cent, and for some diseases like measles, only half the population is vaccinated in certain counties. Romanian authorities have started a pro-vaccination and immunization program allocated the highest amount to date: 153 EUR [USD 172.62]. [According to  , Romanian authorities bought 109 000 doses of anti-measles vaccine.] Alexandru Rafila, president of the Romanian Society for Microbiology, said: \"In several counties, especially those in the west, where the epidemic is evolving the fastest, vaccination coverage is only about 50 per cent. It is very worrying. There is interest, now we need to solve other issues that may be bureaucratic public procurement legislation needs to be improved.\" [byline: Robert Herriman] -- communicated by: ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts [Note the increase in number of cases from 6124 from last report 22 May [2017] to 6434 in this current report. See a map of Romania at - Mod.LK] ****** [3] Canada (Nova Scotia) Date: Mon 29 May 2017 Source: Anapolis County Spectator [edited] Until this year, there had been no confirmed cases of measles in Nova Scotia since 2008. \"We did have a case confirmed that was tested at Valley Regional last week [week of 21-27 May 2017],\" said Dr Trevor Arnason, medical officer of health. He said for every confirmed case, health officials immediately try to identify who could have been exposed by identifying where the victim was at the time they would have been infectious to others. \"From that, we identify who the highest risk groups are that would require vaccination as quickly as possible,\" Arnason said May 29 [2017]. \"So if you provide vaccination within 3 days of the exposure there is a good chance you can abort the infection -- stop it from establishing and prevent someone from getting infected with measles.\" That means from the moment of diagnosis, health officials have to act quickly. They're looking for immunocompromised people, pregnant women and very young children who may have been at the same hospital -- or even in the same store or gas station as the confirmed case. \"Some of those individuals can't receive the vaccine because it's a live virus vaccine, so we give them something called immunoglobulin, which is basically like an active form of the vaccine or the antibodies which are made from human [serum] from another person -- and that protects them against measles,\" he explained. The infection rate is high among unvaccinated populations, Arnason said. In fact, if a person infected with measles walked into a room of 10 unvaccinated people, 9 of those people would become infected. \"There were exposures last week [week of 21-27 May 2017] at the hospital, so we've been following up with a number of people who were at the hospital who may have been exposed in those high-risk groups - to offer them vaccine or immunoglobulin,\" Arnason said. The doctor said the Kentville patient was placed into a negative pressure room as per protocols. Sick child Because of privacy issues, Arnason would not confirm if the measles case at Valley Regional Hospital was the same person as detailed in a Facebook post from an Annapolis County woman on 26 May [2017]. The mother of a small child became concerned about her son's health as far back as 18 May [2017] and said she took him to Annapolis Community Health Centre 22 May with high fever, rash and dehydration. He was isolated because it appeared he had measles but was not diagnosed because he didn't have all the symptoms and had both of his measles vaccinations. The child was sent home and prescribed Benadryl [an antihistamine] and Tylenol [paracetamol/acetaminophen]. He was worse on 23 May and the mother took him to Valley Regional Hospital in Kentville, where she was again told it was not measles and the same treatment was again prescribed. She said they were being sent home again but she refused, demanding blood work and fluids for dehydration. When the doctor seemed hesitant, the mother said she demanded to see a pediatrician -- who had the child tested for measles. The mother described the child being unable to see as he was giving a urine sample and was rushed to ICU. The diagnosis was Kawasaki disease, an immune condition that is not contagious and not a reportable disease. The child spent the night in the hospital and was feeling better the next day, 25 May, when the measles diagnosis was confirmed. Because measles is an airborne disease, the child was put in a negative pressure room until he was no longer contagious, the mother said. It turned out he had Kawasaki disease and measles at the same time. The mother refused to take him home until tests came back normal. Vaccination Measles vaccinations work extremely well, said Arnason, noting that one vaccination is about 93 per cent effective and after 2 vaccinations, it is 97 per cent effective. But there's still that 3 per cent chance. How did the Kentville case contract the measles? \"That's a good question,\" said Arnason. \"That's what we're investigating in public health now. We are currently in a measles outbreak that is centered around the western part of the province.\" He thinks the Kentville patient's condition is connected to that outbreak. Because measles is so contagious, it can at times be transmitted by casually passing somebody in a hallway or on the street, \"So we haven't identified the exact link yet and that's what we do in our investigation. \"For all of our 32 cases that we've had in the province this year [2017], we've been able to identify a link eventually,\" he said. \"But I can't say for sure whether we will in this case. But that's the question top of mind for us as well is figuring out where this transmission might have occurred and how it might have occurred.\" He said if there's another case out there that they don't know about, the health department needs to find it and do the appropriate follow-up, get people vaccinated, and prevent it from spreading. [byline: Lawrence Powell] -- communicated by: ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts [A map of Nova Scotia, Canada, can be found at  ] [", "DENGUE/DHF UPDATE (05): ASIA, PACIFIC, AFRICA, DIAGNOSIS, VACCINE, RESEARCH, CORRECTION *************************************************************************************** A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Correction: Dengue/DHF update (05): Asia, Pacific, Africa, diagnosis, vaccine, research http://promedmail.org/post/20170528.5067858 The post on this topic incorrectly stated the following: \"Thailand National. Sun 28 May 2017. More than 136 000 cases of dengue fever, the world's fastest spreading tropical disease, have been confirmed so far this year [2017], with the highest concentration of cases in and around the capital Bangkok and in the northern province of Chiang Mai. - 126 fatalities so far this year [2017], health experts said on [Thu 25 May 2017], pointing to climate change as a factor behind the spike in cases. Contributed by: John Cathey  \" The following correction has been forwarded by Dr Wanna Hanshaoworkul MD MSC, acting senior expert advisor of the Department of Disease Control Ministry of Public Health, Thailand [email:  ]. \"The situation as posted pertains to 2015 not this year [2017]. The correct situation is published on the website of Bureau of Vectorborne Disease . On [Tue 23 May 2017], there have been 11 062 cumulative cases reported and 19 deaths.\" Our apologies for the error. - Mod.UBA [ A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  .] [", "AVIAN INFLUENZA, HUMAN (55): CHINA, H7N9 **************************************** A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases In this update: [1] Inner Mongolia - ex Beijing and Shaanxi [2] Anhui [3] Hubei ****** [1] Inner Mongolia - ex Beijing and Shaanxi Date: Fri 2 Jun 2017 0:32 AM Source: FIC (Flu Information Centre/Flu in China) [edited] 1. According to the CDC of the Inner Mongolia Municipality, a male patient from Wuyuan county of Bayannur city of inner Mongolia municipality tested postive for H7N9 by Beijing CDC on [Tue 30 May 2017]. Considering the clinical symptoms, epidemiological investigation and lab test results, he was diagnosed as the 1st human case of H7N9 avian influenza [AIV] in inner Mongolia municipality. 2. According to the HFPC of Yulin city, Shaanxi province, a 67 year old female farmer, resident of Tuke town of Uxin Banner of Ordos city of Inner Mongolia Municipality, confirmed to be the 1st imported human H7N9 AIV case in Yulin city on [Wed 31 May 2017]. The patient had sick/dead poultry contact history prior to the onset of symptoms. The patient and her husband developed symptoms such as cough and fever, and did not improve after treatment in the local clinic. She went to a hospital in Yuyang district of Yulin city for treatment on the afternoon of [Mon 29 May 2017] and was transferred to the city Chinese medicine hospital as a suspected human case of H7N9 infection. Her samples tested positve for H7N9 AIV by Yulin city CDC on [Tue 30 May 2017] and were confirmed by Shaanxi provincial CDC on [Wed 31 May 2017]. The patient is now receiving treatment and quarantine in the hospital, all close contacts in Yulin and Ordos cities are under medical monitoring and quarantining. -- communicated by: ProMED-mail [Given that in 2. above both \"the patient and her husband developed symptoms\" it would be useful to know what happened to the husband, too, whether his tests were positive. - Mod.SH] ****** [2] Anhui Date: Fri 2 June 2017 0:4 AM Source: A human H7N9 AIV case confirmed in Bengbu city of Anhui province on 27 May [2017], according to the announcement of HFPC of Anhui. No human H7N9 AIV cases were reported in Anhui province between 8 and 26 May [2017]. -- communicated by: ProMED-mail [3] Hubei Date: 29 May 2017 Source: FIC (Flu Information Centre/Flu in China) [edited] According to the authority, Xiangcheng district of Xiangyang city in Hubei province reported one human H7N9 AIV case on [Sat 27 May 2017] after confirmation by the provincial CDC. The 59 year old male lived in Xiangcheng district of Xiangyang city, had live poultry contact history and live poultry market exposure history, was in a stable condition and remained in [the] designated hospital in Wuhan for treatment and quarantine. None of the close contacts have shown symptoms of influenza-like illness [ILI] so far. -- communicated by: ProMED-mail [As of [Tue 16 May 2017], a total of 1486 laboratory-confirmed cases of human infection with avian influenza A(H7N9) viruses, including at least 571 deaths, have been reported to WHO. The number of human infections with avian influenza A(H7N9) viruses and the geographical distribution of human cases in the 5th epidemic wave (that is, onset since 1 Oct 2016) is greater than in any earlier wave [ ]. This suggests that the virus is spreading, and emphasizes that further intensive surveillance and control measures in both the human and animal health sectors are crucial. - Mod.UBA A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  ,  ,  .] [", "SCHISTOSOMIASIS - PHILIPPINES: RISK, SPREAD ******************************************* A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Mon 29 May 2017 Source: Oubreak news Today [edited] Schistosomiasis, also known as bilharzia and snail fever is endemic in 12 regions and 28 provinces on the Philippines archipelago with a whopping 12 million Filipinos at risk for the parasitic infection, according to a Phil Star report. With some 6.8 million people already exposed to the blood fluke, Dr Vicente Belizario, convener of the Neglected Tropical Diseases Study Group under the University of the Philippines-College of Public Health asks, \"The Philippines has the most number of schistosomiasis globally, believe it or not. But why are we not talking about it? That's because 1st, the problem is only prevalent in poor provinces and not national in scope; 2nd, it's a poor man's disease and it doesn't hit the headlines,\" he said. Schistosomiasis in the Philippines accounts for almost 80 per cent of the burden [of this disease] in the western Pacific region. There are 2 major forms of schistosomiasis, intestinal and urogenital, caused by 5 species of blood fluke. Intestinal schistosomiasis caused by _Schistosoma japonicum_ is endemic in the Philippines. In the Philippines, the highest prevalence is among children ages 5 to 15. -- communicated by: ProMED-MBDS [Schistosomiasis caused by _Schistosoma japonicum_ is endemic in the Phillipines. Two recent studies found point-prevalences of 12.5 per cent and 34 per cent, respectively, in Leyte (Liwanag HJ, et al. Soil-transmitted helminthiasis and schistosomiasis in children of poor families in Leyte, Philippines: lessons for disease prevention and control. J Trop Pediatr. 2017 Jan 23. pii: fmw078) and Northern Samar (Olveda DU, et al. Biennial versus annual treatment for schistosomiasis and its impact on liver morbidity. Int J Infect Dis. 2017;54:145-9). The current control strategy recommended by WHO advocates mass drug administration with a single dose of 40mg/kg of praziquantel (PZQ). However, the current global coverage is 20 per cent, the drug compliance rate is less than 50 per cent, and the drug efficacy is about 50 per cent. Thus in reality, only about 5 per cent of the reservoir human population is actually receiving intermittent chemotherapy (Ross AG, et al. A new global strategy for the elimination of schistosomiasis. Int J Infect Dis. 2017 Jan;54:130-7). Schistosomiasis is a poverty-related disease and control needs an integrated approach, including sanitation and treatment of the animal reservoir. - Mod.EP Zoonotic schistosomiasis has a long endemic history in the Philippines. The species of schistosome endemic in the Philippines is _S. japonicum_ Schistosomiasis is a parasitic disease that silently takes away people's lives in poor areas. Aside from the Philippines, snail fever is also endemic in China and Indonesia. The mortality rate is 1.8 per cent among untreated patients. Transmission occurs when people suffering from schistosomiasis contaminate freshwater sources with their excreta containing parasite eggs, which hatch in water, says WHO. In the Philippines, the reservoirs of infection and environmental contamination include humans, cows, dogs, pigs, carabaos, field rats and monkeys because of open defecation especially in rural areas.  . Schistosomiasis is a snailborne neglected tropical disease, affecting 78 countries and territories in Africa, Asia, South America and the Middle East. Three species are highly pathogenic to man, namely _Schistosoma japonicum_, _S. mansoni_ and _S. haematobium_. _S. japonicum_ occurs mainly in China, the Philippines, and parts of Indonesia, and, unlike other forms of schistosomes, _S. japonicum_ can naturally infect humans and at least 46 other mammalian species. Dogs, cats and rats play a role in schistosomiasis transmission, with dogs and rats showing more consistent effects. Given the zoonotic nature of the disease in the Philippines there is the need for innovative cost-effective strategies to control _S. japonica_ in the long term. Maps of the Philippines can be seen at and a Healthmap can be seen at . - Mod.TTM] [", "AVIAN INFLUENZA (108): ZIMBABWE (MASHONALAND EAST) POULTRY, HPAI H5N8, OIE ************************************************************************** A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Thu 1 Jun 2017 Source: OIE, WAHID [edited] Highly pathogenic influenza viruses, Zimbabwe --------------------------------------------- Information received on 1 Jun 2017 from Dr Unesu Hildah Ushewokunze-Obatolu, principal director, Department of Livestock and Veterinary Services, Harare, Zimbabwe Summary Report type: immediate notification Date of start of the event: 17 May 2017 Date of confirmation of the event: 1 Jun 2017 Reason for notification: new strain of a listed disease in the country Causal agent: highly pathogenic influenza virus Serotype: H5N8 Nature of diagnosis: laboratory (advanced) This event pertains to a defined zone within the country. New outbreaks (1) Summary of outbreaks Total outbreaks: 1 Outbreak 1 (HPAI_ZIM_1_2017): Lanark, Seke, Mashonaland East Date of start of the outbreak: 17 May 2017 Outbreak status: continuing (or date resolved not provided) Epidemiological unit: farm Total animals affected: Species / Susceptible / Cases / Deaths / Killed and disposed of / Slaughtered Birds / 2 000 000 / 7845 / 7845 / 75 155 / 0 Affected population: Self-contained commercial poultry breeding farm for broilers and layers with a total census of 2 million birds. Outbreak statistics [rates apparent, expressed as percentages] Species / Morbidity rate / Mortality rate / Case fatality rate / Proportion susceptible animals lost* Birds / 0.39 / 0.39 / 100 / 4.15 *Removed from the susceptible population through death, destruction, and/or slaughter Epidemiology Source of the outbreak(s) or origin of infection: unknown or inconclusive Epidemiological comments The affected farm has 8 separately managed sites which are at least 1km [0.62 mi] apart. One of the 8 sites was affected, a parent breeding unit for broilers with 83 000 birds. A total of 3045 birds died within a week at this site showing signs consistent with highly pathogenic avian influenza. The affected site is close to a small dam where there are a number of different migratory waterfowl, which are tentatively suspected to be source of infection. Control measures Measures applied: movement control inside the country, surveillance outside containment and/or protection zone, surveillance within containment and/or protection zone, screening, traceability, quarantine, official destruction of animal products, official disposal of carcasses, by-products and waste, stamping out, zoning, disinfection, vaccination prohibited, no treatment of affected animals Measures to be applied: no other measures Diagnostic test results Laboratory name and type / Species / Test / Test date / Result Onderstepoort Veterinary Institute, South Africa (Regional Reference Laboratory) / Birds / real-time reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction (RRT-PCR) / 29 May 2017 / Positive Onderstepoort Veterinary Institute, South Africa (Regional Reference Laboratory)/ Birds / virus sequencing / 1 Jun 2017/ Positive Future reporting The event is continuing. Weekly follow-up reports will be submitted. The location of the outbreak can be seen on the interactive map included in the OIE report at the source URL above. -- communicated by: ProMED-mail [In Africa, HPAI subtype H5N8 has been reported in Cameroon, Egypt, Niger, Nigeria, Tunisia and Uganda. H5N8 HPAI outbreaks officially reported in Asia, Europe and Africa by onset date, from 1 June 2016 to 10 May 2017 (last update) can be seen on the map at  . - Mod.CRD A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  .] [", "CHOLERA, DIARRHEA AND DYSENTERY UPDATE (44): ASIA (YEMEN) ********************************************************* A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases [1] New statistics Date: Sat 3 Jun 2017 17:25:35 Source: XinHuaNet [edited] The death toll of months-long cholera in war-torn Yemen has risen to 605, with suspected cases exceeding 73 700, the World Health Organization [WHO] said [on Fri 2 Jun 2017]. \"Cholera continues to spread in Yemen. Over 73 700 suspected cholera cases and 605 associated deaths have been reported in 19 governorates,\" WHO said on its official twitter account. The death toll has rapidly increased 2 days after WHO put the figure at 532 and the number of suspected cases at 65 300 on [Wed 31 May 2017]. The deadly disease has been rapidly spreading across Yemen since [Thu 27 Apr 2017], WHO said. The organization warned that the health care system in Yemen is on the verge of collapse as many hospitals have shut down because of the ongoing conflict, saying only 45 per cent of Yemen's hospitals are operational, and they are facing a shortage of supplies and staff. The impoverished Arab country in the southern tip of the Arabian Peninsula has been locked in a civil war since 2015. The war pits Iranian-allied dominant Houthi movement, backed by forces loyal to former president Ali Abdullah Saleh, against their foe of Saudi-backed government of President Abd-Rabbo Mansour Hadi. The capital Sana'a and most of the northern provinces are under the control of Houthi rebels. -- communicated by: ProMED-mail ****** [2] Cholera vaccine comment Date: Fri 2 Jun 2017 From: Timothy Herrick [edited] Reports on cholera have mentioned Dukoral but failed to mention Vaxchora which I believe is the same vaccine but licensed in the USA. -- Timothy Herrick [The statistics of the ongoing epidemic in Yemen in 2017 are: Date (2017) / Cases / Deaths 08 May / 1360 / 25 11 May / 2752 / 51 13 May / 8595 / 115 14 May / 11 000 / 180 17 May / 17 200 / 209 19 May / 23 500 / 242 21 May / 29 300 / 315 22 May / 35 217 / 361 24 May / 42 207 / 420 27 May / 51 832 / 471 30 May / 65 300 / 532 02 Jun / 73 700 / 605 ProMED-mail thanks Timothy Herrick for his comment on cholera vaccine. I inadvertently left out the paragraph on the newest cholera vaccine, the 1st licensed in the USA, which is from the same reference - Lutwick LI, Preis J, Choi P: Cholera. In: Chronic illness and disability: the pediatric gastrointestinal tract. Greydanus DE, Atay O, Merrick J (eds). NY: Nova Bioscience, 2017 (in press): \"In June 2016, the US FDA for the 1st time approved a cholera vaccine for use locally in travelers to cholera-endemic areas. This vaccine, Vaxchora, is an oral live, attenuated biologic (62) that is a reformulation of a previous product. This product, a single dose immunization also referred to as CVD 102-HgR, must be stored in the frozen state and as a live, attenuated bacterial vaccine is not given until at least 14 days after antibacterials were used and should be given at least 10 days before oral chloroquine antimalarial prophylaxis. Single dose use is an advantage over the older inactivated products which are given in 2 doses. Studies, however, have suggested that one dose of these inactivated oral vaccines can be effective when the vaccines are in short supply in both endemic and outbreak situations (63, 64). \"62. Freedman DO. Re-born in the USA: another cholera vaccine for travelers. Travel Med Infect Dis. 2016;14: 295-296. 63. Qadri F, Wierzba TF, Ali M, et al. Efficacy of a single dose, inactivated oral cholera vaccine in Bangladesh. N Engl J Med. 2016;374: 1723-1732. 64. Azman AS, Parker LA, Rumunu J, et al. Effectiveness of one dose of oral cholera vaccine in response to an outbreak: a case-cohort study. Lancet Global Health 2016;4: e856-e863.\" This new vaccine is not the same as Dukoral or Shanchol as it is a live, attenuated biologic instead of inactivated and is suggested for one dose only immunization - Mod.LL A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  .] [", "AVIAN INFLUENZA (109): BELGIUM (LUXEMBOURG) PHASIANIDAE, HPAI H5N8, OIE *********************************************************************** A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Fri 2 Jun 2017 Source: OIE, WAHID (World Animal Health Information Database), weekly disease information 2017; 30(23) [edited] Highly pathogenic influenza A viruses (infection with) (non-poultry including wild birds), Belgium ------------------------------------------------------------------- Information received on [and dated] 2 Jun 2017 from Dr Jean-Fran\u00e7ois Heymans, director, Animal Health and Safety of Products of Animal Origin, Federal Agency for the Safety of the Food Chain (FASFC), Bruxelles, Belgium Summary Report type: immediate notification Date of start of the event: 22 May 2017 Date of confirmation of the event: 1 Jun 2017 Reason for notification: reoccurrence of a listed disease Date of previous occurrence: 28 Mar 2017 Manifestation of disease: clinical disease Causal agent: highly pathogenic influenza A virus Serotype: H5N8 Nature of diagnosis: laboratory (advanced), necropsy This event pertains to a defined zone within the country. New outbreaks (1) Summary of outbreaks Total outbreaks: 1 Outbreak 1: Wellin, Luxembourg Date of start of the outbreak: 22 May 2017 Outbreak status: resolved on 2 Jun 2017 Epidemiological unit: other Total animals affected Species / Susceptible / Cases / Deaths / Killed and disposed of / Slaughtered _Phasianidae_ (unidentified): _Phasianidae_ (incognita)(_Phasianidae_)/ 11 / - / 4 / 7 / 0 Epidemiology Source of the outbreak(s) or origin of infection: contact with wild species Control measures Measures applied: surveillance outside containment and/or protection zone, surveillance within containment and/or protection zone, traceability, official destruction of animal products, official disposal of carcasses, by-products and waste, stamping out, control of wildlife reservoirs, zoning, vaccination prohibited, no treatment of affected animals Measures to be applied: disinfection Diagnostic test results Laboratory name and type / Species / Test / Test date / Result CERVA (National laboratory)/_Phasianidae_ (unidentified)/ nucleotide sequencing/ 1 Jun 2017 / Positive CERVA (National laboratory)/_Phasianidae_ (unidentified)/ / real-time reverse transcriptase/polymerase chain reaction (RRT-PCR) / 31 May 2017 / Positive CERVA (National laboratory)/_Phasianidae_ (unidentified)/ virus isolation/ - / Pending Future reporting The event is continuing. Weekly follow-up reports will be submitted. [The location of the outbreak can be seen on the interactive map included in the OIE report at the source URL above.] -- communicated by: ProMED-mail [According to the information published by the Federal Agency for the Safety of the Food Chain (FASFC) found at  (last update 2 Jun 2017): \"Between February 3th 2017 and June 2nd 2017, 6 cases of HPAI (subtype H5N8) were identified in Belgium's wild bird population. Two of these HPAI contaminations were found in captive wild birds. Those cases were notified to the OIE in accordance with the provisions included in Article 1.1.3 of the OIE Terrestrial Code. No outbreak of HPAI in poultry has been identified since 2003. Avian influenza is not present in Belgian poultry farms. Poultry and poultry products from Belgium remain safe. Since avian influenza is not present on poultry farms, Belgium is still considered as \u00ab free \u00bb of this disease pursuant to the definitions contained in the OIE terrestrial code (chapter 10.4). In Belgium, permanent biosecurity measures are in place in the higher risk areas (resting places and/or areas with a high density of migratory birds), so as to avoid any contact between domestic poultry and wild birds\". - Mod.CRD A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  .] [", "VEILLONELLA - USA: (IDAHO) TULAREMIA NOT **************************************** A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Thu 1 Jun 2017 Source: CDC. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep. 2017; 66: 564-565 [edited] Notes from the field: Veillonella misidentified as _Francisella tularensis_ -- Idaho, 2016 --------------------------------------------------------------- In October 2016, the Idaho Bureau of Laboratories, Division of Public Health, was notified by hospital A's clinical laboratory (a member of the Idaho Sentinel Laboratory Network) that a bacterial isolate cultured from a hospitalized patient's knee joint fluid aspirate had been identified with 96 per cent confidence as _Francisella tularensis_ (a Tier 1 select agent*) by an in-house automated microbial identification system (AMIS). The isolate was submitted to the Idaho Bureau of Laboratories for confirmatory testing using Laboratory Response Network (LRN) reference methods. Hospital A laboratory personnel reported that the isolate had been manipulated on the open bench and certain laboratory workers had potentially been exposed. The Division of Public Health, hospital A, and Eastern Idaho Public Health initiated an investigation to confirm _F. tularensis_, assess potential laboratory exposures, and determine the source of infection. The investigation determined that the infectious agent was veillonella and not _F. tularensis_. The patient, a man aged over 75 years, had a multiyear history of chronic unilateral knee pain, during which time he had received a series of 3 intra-articular injections of hyaluronate sodium 2 years previously, and several intra-articular injections of triamcinolone with bupivacaine, the last of which occurred 15 days before he sought care at hospital A for a swollen knee. Gram staining of an intra-articular aspirate obtained that day from the affected knee showed Gram-variable cocci. The aspirate was cultured under aerobic and anaerobic conditions. Slow-growing colonies of Gram negative cocci were observed from the anaerobic culture, with limited growth in aerobic conditions. Because an anaerobic AMIS panel was not available, isolates from the aerobic culture were processed for identification and antimicrobial susceptibility on the AMIS using a panel specific for aerobic organisms. Identification of _F. tularensis_ by the AMIS triggered notification of the Division of Public Health and revision of the patient's antimicrobial regimen from vancomycin, piperacillin, and tazobactam to ciprofloxacin. Eastern Idaho Public Health interviewed the patient and determined that he lived in a rural area and reported no recent exposure to potential sources of naturally occurring _F. tularensis_ (for example, ill animals, arthropod bites, contaminated water, or use of lawn mowers or string trimmers near dead animals). The Idaho Bureau of Laboratories and Eastern Idaho Public Health provided the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention [CDC] guidance on tularemia laboratory exposure (1) to hospital A and assisted staff members in assessing potential exposures of laboratory personnel. Among 24 employees interviewed by hospital A, 19 were considered to have potential exposure; all 19 elected to start antimicrobial prophylaxis because of a high level of concern regarding risk and the approximately 48 hours required for confirmatory testing. Using LRN real-time polymerase chain reaction methods, the Idaho Bureau of Laboratories tested the isolate for _F. tularensis_ and _Brucella spp_.; no _F. tularensis_ or _Brucella spp_ DNA was detected. Subsequent partial 16S ribosomal RNA (rRNA) gene sequencing identified a _Veillonella sp_. According to Clinical and Laboratory Standards Institute guidelines, Veillonella species-level identification could not be reported because the 16S rRNA gene fragment had a more than 99 per cent sequence identity for both _V. parvula_ and _V. dispar_ without a less than 0.8 per cent difference between them (2). Partial RNA polymerase subunit B gene (rpoB) sequencing conducted on the isolate found a more than 99 per cent sequence identity to V. parvula_, suggesting this as the most likely species of the isolate (3). After identification of _Veillonella sp_., the patient's antimicrobial regimen was changed to piperacillin, tazobactam, and ertapenem sodium; personnel who were receiving prophylactic antimicrobials for potential _F. tularensis_ exposure were informed that continuation of prophylaxis was not recommended or necessary. The Division of Public Health reviewed MedWatch data and did not identify any reports of veillonella infection associated with hyaluronate sodium, triamcinolone, or bupivacaine. The source of this patient's infection was not determined. _Veillonella spp._ are small, slow-growing, nonmotile anaerobic Gram negative cocci found as part of the normal flora of gastrointestinal, respiratory, and vaginal tracts. Although _Veillonella spp._ are classified as anaerobes, anaerobic organisms (including _Veillonella spp._) have been observed growing in aerobic conditions for a limited time after isolation before becoming nonviable (4). Often considered contaminants of clinical specimen collection, _Veillonella spp._ have been rarely isolated from monomicrobial cultures of invasive infections. Predisposing factors for invasive infection have not been fully studied, but might include local or systemic immune suppression and localized anaerobic conditions produced by tissue necrosis, diminished blood supply, or prolonged infection with aerobes (5). This is the 1st published report of misidentification of _Veillonella sp._ as _F. tularensis_ by an AMIS and of isolation of _Veillonella sp._ from a nonprosthetic knee. Hospital and public health staff members responded appropriately to the preliminary misidentification of the isolate as _F. tularensis_; however, accurate identification would have obviated the need for time-intensive response activities, use of prophylactic antimicrobials by hospital staff members, and inappropriately targeted antimicrobial therapy for the patient. Clinical laboratories are advised not to use a commercial AMIS if a select agent is suspected in a clinical sample (6) and to consult with their LRN-biologic laboratory for guidance and sample referral. Clinicians should consider _Veillonella spp._ when receiving laboratory reports of _F. tularensis_ generated by AMISs. Because _Veillonella spp._ are typically resistant to recommended or alternative antimicrobial therapies for tularemia (i.e., streptomycin, gentamicin, tetracyclines, ciprofloxacin, and other fluoroquinolones), antibacterial coverage for both _Veillonella spp._ and _F. tularensis_ could be considered until final microbial identification is available. [authors: Carter KK, Peterson EM, Voermans RL, et al] * Tier 1 select agents are biologic agents and toxins that present the greatest risk for deliberate misuse with significant potential for mass casualties or devastating effects to the economy, critical infrastructure, or public confidence, and pose a severe threat to public health and safety. References ---------- 1. CDC. Tularemia fact sheet: managing potential laboratory exposures to F. tularensis. Atlanta, GA: US Department of Health and Human Services, CDC; 2015. 2. Clinical and Laboratory Standards Institute. Interpretive criteria for identification of bacteria and fungi by DNA target sequencing; approved guideline. CLSI document MM18-A. Wayne, PA: Clinical and Laboratory Standards Institute; 2008. 3. Beighton D, Clark D, Hanakuka B, Gilbert S, Do T. The predominant cultivable Veillonella spp. of the tongue of healthy adults identified using rpoB sequencing. Oral Microbiol Immunol. 2008;23:344-347. 4. Tally FP, Stewart PR, Sutter VL, Rosenblatt JE. Oxygen tolerance of fresh clinical anaerobic bacteria. J Clin Microbiol. 1975;1:161-164. 5. Brook I. Spectrum and treatment of anaerobic infections. J Infect Chemother. 2016;22:1-13. 6. Snyder JW, ed. General introduction, recommendations and biochemical procedures. In: American Society for Microbiology. Laboratory response network (LRN) sentinel level clinical laboratory protocols for suspected biological threat agents and emerging infectious diseases. Washington, DC: American Society for Microbiology; 2016. -- communicated by: ProMED-mail rapporteur Brent Barrett [Several important points can be made here: 1. A variety of anaerobes, such as veillonella, can grow initially aerobically only to become non viable. 2. Injection of sterile body cavities with corticosteroids can produce infections with unusual organisms. 3. Automated microbiological identification systems, even with a high degree of confidence, can misidentify organisms. 4. Identification of Tier 1 organisms should always be confirmed by genetic or newer technology such as Matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization time-of-flight mass spectrometry (MALDI-TOF MS). - Mod.LL A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  .] [", "HANTAVIRUS - AMERICAS (35): CHILE (BIO BIO) ******************************************* A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Thu 1 Jun 2017 15:18 Source: Bio Bio Chile [in Spanish, trans. Mod.TY, edited] A 44 year old farmer resident of the Laja community became the 3rd death due to [a] hantavirus [infection] so far this year [2017] in the Bio Bio region. The man became infected in an area near to Santa Elena, where he became seriously ill, adding to the other 2 victims from Arauco province, stated the Health SEREMI [Secretaria Regional Ministerial de Salud; local ministerial unit]. These numbers represent a higher incidence of fatalities in comparison to the previous year [2016], indicated the epidemiologist Andrea Munoz, who stated that to date 14 cases in the area have been confirmed with 3 fatal victims. As of [Wed 31 May 2017], 8 more cases have been registered, more than the 6 cases as of the same date in 2016; noting the 7 cases currently in Nuble, 4 in Biobio province 2 in Arauco and 1 in Concepcion. Adding to what was said, in 2016 a total of 10 cases were confirmed in the region, with one death, which represents a case fatality rate of 10 per cent. [byline: Alejandro Alarcon] -- communicated by: ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts [The situation under which the farmer acquired his hantavirus infection is not stated. As a farmer, he no doubt came into contact with areas inhabited by the rodent reservoir of the virus. The numbers of cases of hantavirus infections in the Bio Bio region continues to increase this year [2017]. Although not specified in this or previous reports from the region, the hantavirus involved in these cases no doubt is Andes virus. This virus is endemic in Chile, including the Bio Bio region, and cases of hantavirus pulmonary syndrome occur every year. Andes virus is rarely transmitted directly person-to-person and if it does is only with very close physical contact, usually within the family. The most common source of the infection is the long-tailed pygmy rice rat. Images of the long-tailed pygmy rice rat (_Oligoryzomys longicaudatus_), the sigmodontine rodent host of Andes hantavirus, can be seen at  . Maps of Chile can be seen at  and  . - Mod.TY] [", "LASSA FEVER - WEST AFRICA (19): NIGERIA *************************************** A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Fri 26 May 2017 Source: Nigeria Centre for Disease Control [NCDC] Weekly Epidemiological Report 7 (19) [edited] 1. Lassa fever Please note that the data reflect the routine reports -- that is, all suspected cases including the laboratory positive and negative cases 1.1. Two suspected cases of Lassa fever were reported from two LGAs ([local government areas] 2 states) in week 19, 2017 compared with zero during the same period in 2016. 1.2. Laboratory results of the 2 suspected cases were negative (Cross River - 1 and Nassarawa - 1). 1.3. Between weeks one and 19 (2017), 258 suspected Lassa fever cases with 58 laboratory confirmed cases and 46 deaths (case fatality rate [CFR] 18 per cent) from 51 LGAs (20 states) were reported compared with 657 suspected cases with 63 laboratory confirmed cases and 75 deaths (CFR 11 per cent) from 122 LGAs (27 states) during the same period in 2016 (figure 1). 1.4. Between weeks 1 and 52 of 2016, 921 suspected Lassa fever cases with 109 laboratory confirmed cases and 119 deaths (CFR 13 per cent) from 144 LGAs (28 states and the Federal Capital Territory [FCT]) were reported compared with 430 suspected cases with 25 laboratory confirmed cases and 40 deaths (CFR 9 per cent) from 37 LGAs (14 states and the FCT) during the same period in 2015 (figure 2). 1.5. Investigation and active case search is ongoing in affected states with coordination of response activities by the NCDC with support from partners. 1.5.1. National Lassa Fever Working Group meeting and weekly National Surveillance and Outbreak Response meeting ongoing at NCDC to keep abreast of the current Lassa fever situation in the country. 1.5.2. Response materials for viral haemorrhagic fevers [VHFs] prepositioned across the country by NCDC at the beginning of the dry season. 1.5.3. New VHF guidelines have been developed by the NCDC (interim national viral haemorrhagic fevers preparedness guidelines and standard operating procedures for Lassa fever management). 1.5.4. Ongoing reclassification of reported Lassa fever cases. 1.5.5. Ongoing review of the variables for case-based surveillance for VHF. 1.5.6. VHF case-based forms completed by affected states are being entered into the new VHF management system. This system allows for the creation of a VHF database for the country. 1.5.7. Confirmed cases are being treated at identified treatment/isolation centres across the States with Ribavirin and necessary supportive management also instituted. 1.5.8. Onsite support was earlier provided to Ogun, Nasarawa, Taraba, Ondo and Borno States by the NCDC and partners. 1.5.9. Offsite support provided by NCDC/partners in all affected states. 1.5.10. States are enjoined to intensify surveillance. Figure 1: Map of Nigeria showing areas affected by Lassa fever, week 1-19, 2016 and 2017 and Figure 2: Map of Nigeria showing areas affected by Lassa fever, week 1-53, 2015 and week 1-52, 2016 are available at the source URL, above. Table of cases by state, cumulative data weeks 1-19: State: Cases / Lab Confirmed / Deaths Adamawa: 6 / 0 / 2 Bauchi: 9 / 3 / 3 Cross River: 5 / 0 / 0 Ebonyi: 4 / 1 / 1 Edo: 91 / 20 / 9 Enugu: 1 / 1 / 1 FCT: 2 / 0 / 0 Gombe: 15 / 0 / 1 Jigawa: 1 / 0 / 0 Kadun: 1 / 0 / 0 Kano: 23 / 2 / 10 Kebbi: 1 / 0 / 1 Kogi: 2 / 1 / 1 Nasarawa: 27 / 6 / 2 Ogun: 8 / 1 / 0 Ondo: 13 / 6 / 2 Plateau: 5 / 4 / 3 Rivers: 6 / 1 / 0 Taraba: 37 / 12 / 9 Yobe: 1 / 0 / 1 Total: 258 / 58 / 46 -- communicated by: Olutayo Olajide Babalobi Lecturer and Consultant Epizootiologist (One Health, Participatory Epizootiology and Veterinary ICT Research Group) Department of Veterinary Public Health and Preventive Medicine Faculty of Veterinary Medicine University of Ibadan Ibadan, Nigeria [Dr Olutayo Olajide Babalobi is thanked for sending in this report. Cases of Lassa fever are continuing to occur in Nigeria. As noted in earlier comments, Lassa fever remains a problem in Nigeria because the virus is endemic there. Virus transmission to humans occur when people are in contact with the reservoir rodent host, the multimammate mouse (in the genus _Mastomys_) or their excreta. Transmission also occurs in health facilities when personal protection equipment is not employed and barrier nursing practices are not adequate to protect staff from blood and secretions of infected patients. Also, as noted in earlier posts, prevention and control of Lassa fever in nature depends on control of the rodent reservoir, which occurs across Nigeria and beyond. Reduction of populations of this rodent will require active participation at the village level. That will necessitate mounting a public education program with support of rodent control technicians. Preventing entry of rodents into the home and keeping food materials tightly covered are helpful measures to prevent infection. Elimination of these rodents completely is probably not possible. Images of _Mastomys_ mice can be seen at  . Maps of Nigeria can be accessed at  and  . - Mod.TY] [", "MERS-COV (31): SAUDI ARABIA (MAKKAH, RIYADH) NOSOCOMIAL TRANSMISSION ******************************************************************** A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Sat 3 Jun 2017 Source: Saudi MOH 2 Jun 2017 [edited] As of 14:00 [2:00 PM] today [Sat 3 Jun 2017], there have been a total of: 1619 laboratory-confirmed cases of MERS-CoV infection, including 665 deaths [reported case fatality rate 41.1 per cent], 942 recoveries, and 12 currently active cases. [As previously mentioned, the numbers of deaths, recoveries and currently active cases come from my spreadsheet tallies and differ from those listed on the Saudi MOH website - my spreadsheet counts asymptomatic infections. - Mod.MPP] Since the last ProMED-mail update [Thu 1 Jun 2017], there have been a total of: 4 newly confirmed cases 0 newly reported fatalities, and 0 newly reported recoveries. Information on newly confirmed cases (4 cases) 1 - a 51 year old Saudi male, non-healthcare worker from Jeddah [Makkah region] currently in a stable condition. Classified as a secondary healthcare acquired case in a hospital visitor. 2 - a 30 year old expat female, healthcare worker from Riyadh [Riyadh region] currently listed in a stable condition, having been identified as an asymptomatic contact of a confirmed MERS-CoV infected individual. Classified as a secondary healthcare acquired case in a healthcare worker. 3 - a 33 year old expat female, healthcare worker from Riyadh [Riyadh region] currently listed in a stable condition, having been identified as an asymptomatic contact of a confirmed MERS-CoV infected individual. Classified as a secondary healthcare acquired case in a healthcare worker. 4 - a 30 year old expat female, healthcare worker from Riyadh [Riyadh region] currently listed in a stable condition, having been identified as an asymptomatic contact of a confirmed MERS-CoV infected individual. Classified as a secondary healthcare acquired case in a healthcare worker. -- communicated by: ProMED-mail [It appears as though there is continued nosocomial transmission in Riyadh with the identification of 3 additional healthcare workers found to be infected with MERS-CoV. During the month of May [2017], there were 3 healthcare workers from Riyadh also found to be asymptomatic MERS-CoV infected individuals. In addition, there is a hospital visitor in Jeddah who was identified as a symptomatic individual with laboratory confirmed infection with the MERS-CoV. Presumably with documented contact with the case reported on 25 May 2017. To the best of my knowledge, this is the 1st case confirmed in a hospital visitor identified on the Saudi MOH website. The other reported contact cases were in either healthcare workers or household contacts. Maps showing the locations of these newly confirmed infected individuals can be found at the source URL. The HealthMap/ProMED map of Saudi Arabia can be found at: . - Mod.MPP] [", "JAPANESE ENCEPHALITIS - AUSTRALIA ex THAILAND ********************************************* A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Sat 3 Jun 2017 From: Drs David Hamer and Karin Leder (Melbourne site) on behalf of the GeoSentinel surveillance network [edited] We report a man aged in his 60s with short term travel to Thailand now diagnosed with Japanese encephalitis. He has no relevant past medical history. Pre-travel advice had not been sought and no pre-travel vaccinations received nor had he a prior history of vaccination for Japanese encephalitis. He travelled to Phuket, Thailand in early May [2017] (day 1 of trip) and stayed at a resort. While in Phuket, he became lethargic on day 8 of the trip. He travelled to Bangkok on day 10 and returned to Australia on day 13. During the 4 days in Bangkok he continued to be lethargic, slept for several hours each day, had poor appetite and was sweaty. There was no report of headaches or confusion. Multiple mosquito bites were noted. There was no report of animal contacts nor of travel to rural regions. On return to Australia he presented to the local hospital on day 14 (from the beginning of his trip) with confusion. A lumbar puncture on day 15 demonstrated glucose 3.5 mmol/L (2.2 - 3.9), protein 1.3 g/L ( ): \"Avoid mosquito bites: - use insect repellent. When you go outdoors, use an EPA-registered insect repellent such as those containing DEET, IR3535, picaridin or oil of lemon eucalyptus. Even a short time outdoors can be long enough to get a mosquito bite. For more information about insect repellents, see Protection against Mosquitoes, Ticks, and Other Insects & Arthropods; - wear proper clothing to reduce mosquito bites. When weather permits, wear long-sleeves, long pants and socks when outdoors. Mosquitoes may bite through thin clothing, so treating clothes with repellent containing permethrin or another EPA-registered repellent will give extra protection. Don't apply repellents containing permethrin directly to skin; - reduce exposure to mosquitoes during peak biting hours. The mosquitoes that transmit JE virus feed mainly outside during the cooler hours from dusk to dawn. Travelers to high risk areas should consider minimizing outdoor activities at these times if possible. To reduce the risk of JE and other vectorborne diseases, travelers should stay in air-conditioned or well-screened rooms, or use a bed net and aerosol room insecticides. Obtain vaccine if recommended: JE vaccine is recommended for travelers who plan to spend one month or more in endemic areas during the JE virus transmission season. This includes long-term travelers, recurrent travelers, or expatriates who will be based in urban areas but are likely to visit endemic rural or agricultural areas during a high-risk period of JE virus transmission. Vaccine should also be considered for the following: - Short-term (less than one month) travelers to endemic areas during the transmission season, if they plan to travel outside an urban area and their activities will increase the risk of JE virus exposure. Examples of higher-risk activities or itineraries include: 1) spending substantial time outdoors in rural or agricultural areas, especially during the evening or night; 2) participating in extensive outdoor activities (such as camping, hiking, trekking, biking, fishing, hunting, or farming); and 3) staying in accommodations without air conditioning, screens, or bed nets. - travelers to an area with an ongoing JE outbreak; - travelers to endemic areas who are uncertain of specific destinations, activities, or duration of travel. JE vaccine is not recommended for short-term travelers whose visits will be restricted to urban areas or times outside a well-defined JE virus transmission season.\" The specific localities in the Phuket area where the individual had been or activities that might have exposed him to the bite of JEV infected mosquitoes is not stated. Although the risk of acquiring a clinical JEV infection during visits of a few days in a JEV endemic area is quite low, the consequences of being infected by this virus can be very serious, as illustrated by the above case. Travelers should be advised of the risk sufficiently prior to travel so that should they elect to be vaccinated, the vaccine can be applied early enough to provide protection on arrival. Drs David Hamer and Karin Leder as well as Dr Shio Yen Tio, Dr Khai Lin Huang and Associate Professor Steven Tong are thanked for providing this report. - Mod.TY A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  .] [", "ANTHRAX - INDIA (06): (JHARKHAND) ELEPHANT ****************************************** A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Fri 2 Jun 017 Source: Pioneer [edited] The department of veterinary pathology in Ranchi veterinary college Ranchi has diagnosed that the robust young adult elephant -- less than 30 years old -- died of _Bacillus anthracis_ [infection], the cause of anthrax. A blood smear of the ear vein of the deceased elephant was submitted to the Ranchi veterinary college's veterinary pathology department. The blood smear was collected by Dr Ajay Kumar. Kumar is a vet officer in BB Biological park Ormanjhi. The examination of the blood smear found typical bacilli with a bamboo stick appearance. The \"bamboo stick\" appearance is a chief characteristic of _Bacillus anthracis_. Pathologically and morphologically it is now proven that anthrax killed this young elephant in PTR [Palamu Tiger Reserve]. The elephant was found dead on May 26 [2017]. Blood smear was oozing from its orifices. Field director of PTR, M P Singh, has confirmed this examination report of blood smear by the vet pathology of Ranchi vet college Ormanjhi. Singh referred to the report of K K Singh who is the chairman of the veterinary pathology. It is K K Singh's signature on the report which reads _Bacillus anthracis_. PTR officials have their fingers crossed. Cattle grazing is just non stoppable [in the wildlife parks] as farmers and cattle owners are too apathetic towards the welfare of the wildlife here. M P Singh said that as this elephant is still buried and not burnt [they are open to] suggestion for its DNA test too to trace the strain of anthrax. -- communicated by: ProMED-mail [For a description of Ranch in Jkarkhand state, go to  , and for Kharkhand go to  . It is an old story of the risks posed by local farmers granzing their livestock in wildlife parks, which just increases the problems. It is no small effort to bury an adult elephant and the PTR people are to be congratulated on achieving it. - Mod.MHJ A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  .] [", "JAPANESE ENCEPHALITIS AND OTHER - INDIA (04): (ODISHA) ****************************************************** A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Sat 3 Jun 2017 Source: Odisha TV [edited] After Malkangiri, Japanese encephalitis (JE) has appeared in Mayurbhanj district, with reports of a child being affected by the disease. According to sources, a boy of 8 years of Kuamara village under Gopabandhunagar in Mayurbhanj district has been affected by the viral disease and is undergoing treatment in a hospital. The blood sample of Deepak was sent to Sishu Bhavan in Cuttack for tests. When the blood sample report came out positive [for JE virus infection], he was admitted to a hospital for treatment. Taking prompt action, the health department has sent a team of doctors to the JE affected village for collection of blood samples and sensitising the villagers about the disease. -- communicated by: ProMED-mail [The JE virus transmission season is beginning in north eastern India. Odisha state is endemic for Japanese encephalitis (JE) virus, and cases occur there frequently. As with cases of encephalitis in other states in north eastern India, not all encephalitis cases are due to JE virus and are classified as acute encephalitis syndrome (AES) with undetermined etiology. This case, however, is a confirmed JE case. Pigs may serve as amplifying hosts, but the reservoir species are avians, including ardeid birds (such as herons and egrets), which can be the species responsible for maintenance and movement of the virus in the area. Repeated insecticide spraying can reduce population of culex mosquitoes, but vaccination of individuals is likely to be the most effective way to prevent JE cases. The Malkangiri district administration had a vaccination program for children in the age group of 1-15 against Japanese encephalitis (JE) virus until 24 Dec 2016 [See Japanese encephalitis & other - India (38): (OR) http://promedmail.org/post/20161218.4706272]. Since the JE virus transmission season is just starting now, this would be an ideal time to continue vaccination campaigns in endemic areas where cases occur annually. Maps of India can be accessed at  and  . - Mod.TY A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  .] [", "MUSHROOM POISONING - USA: (CALIFORNIA) ************************************** A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases [1] Date: 3 Jun 2017 Source: Huffington Post [edited] Death cap mushrooms foraged in Northern California have severely poisoned 14 people in the past few months, 3 so seriously that they needed liver transplants. One victim is a toddler who will have \"permanent neurological impairment,\" according to a medical report. The high number of poisonings has alarmed officials. The mushrooms, often mistaken for a benign variety, have flourished this year [2017] in heavy rains. Mushroom experts 1st noticed a particularly large bloom of death caps in November 2016. News of the string of poisonings that began in December 2016 came to light this week in a \"Morbidity and Mortality\" report by the federal Centers for Disease Control and Prevention [CDC]. Besides the toddler, the victims ranged from 19 to 93 years of age, according to the CDC statistics. The poisonings occurred in 5 counties, and hospital stays ranged from 6 to 36 days. The worst case involved an entire family in Salinas. A woman who was given the mushrooms by a forager cooked them for herself, her husband, her 18 month old daughter, her sister and a friend. They all became ill, and the toddler and the woman's sister needed liver transplants. \"It was like a bus accident happening right in front of the hospital,\" Dr Todd Mitchell told The Santa Cruz Sentinel as he described the life-and-death demands of treating mushroom poisoning. Mitchell, one of the authors of the CDC report, is conducting a clinical trial to determine the effectiveness of a treatment protocol. _Amanita phalloides_ is one of the deadliest mushrooms on Earth and is responsible for 90 per cent of mushroom poisonings around the world. Once the mushroom's amatoxin is ingested, it begins to kill cells, eventually shutting down organs [There are actually 3 closely related toxins, amatoxins, phallotoxins and virotoxins, in the death cap mushroom. - Mod.TG] The mushrooms are most abundant during rainy fall and winter months, but they can survive throughout the year in coastal fog in California. The CDC report urges extreme caution when hunting for wild mushrooms, adding that \"inexperienced foragers should be strongly discouraged from eating any wild mushrooms.\" The mushrooms are a serious threat in remote areas around the globe where medical help is too far for quick treatment. \"These mushrooms continue to wipe out entire families each and every year in Nepal, South Africa, Russia, Ukraine, Viet Nam and India as well as China,\" Mitchell told the Sentinel. \"Amanita mushroom poisoning is an unrecognized worldwide public health crisis. Literally, hundreds die every single year.\" [byline: Mary Papenfuss] -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail ****** [2] Date: 2 Jun 2017 Source: CDC. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep [edited] _Amanita phalloides_, colloquially known as the \"death cap,\" belongs to the Phalloideae section of the Amanita family of mushrooms and is responsible for most deaths following ingestion of foraged mushrooms worldwide (1). On 28 Nov 2016, members of the Bay Area Mycological Society notified personnel at the California Poison Control System (CPCS) of an unusually large _A. phalloides_ bloom in the greater San Francisco Bay Area, coincident with the abundant rainfall and recent warm weather. Five days later, CPCS received notification of the 1st human _A. phalloides_ poisoning of the season. Over the following 2 weeks, CPCS was notified of an additional 13 cases of hepatotoxicity resulting from _A. phalloides_ ingestion. In the past few years before this outbreak, CPCS received reports of only a few mushroom poisoning cases per year. A summary of 14 reported cases is presented here. Data extracted from patient medical charts revealed a pattern of delayed gastrointestinal manifestations of intoxication leading to dehydration and hepatotoxicity. Three patients received liver transplants, and all but one recovered completely. The morbidity and potential lethality associated with _A. phalloides_ ingestion are serious public health concerns and warrant medical provider education and dissemination of information cautioning against consuming foraged wild mushrooms. Initial case A man aged 37 years (patient A) picked 2 wild mushrooms in Santa Rosa, California. He cooked and ate one mushroom, and about 10 hours later developed nausea, vomiting, and diarrhea. He was evaluated in a local emergency department (ED) for abdominal discomfort 20.5 hours after ingestion. A mycologist identified the uncooked mushroom sample provided by the patient as _A. phalloides_. Initial laboratory findings were notable for an elevated white blood cell count with lactate elevation and elevated creatinine suggesting dehydration (table). Liver function tests (LFTs) 6 hours later showed elevated aspartate aminotransferase (AST) (92 IU/L; normal = 15-41) and alanine aminotransferase (ALT) (95 IU/L; normal = 17-63) levels. He was treated with aggressive intravenous (IV) fluid hydration, IV octreotide, and IV silibinin. Two days after ingestion, the patient's LFTs peaked at AST = 6,159 IU/L, ALT = 3,084 IU/L, total bilirubin = 2.9 mg/dL (normal = 0.2-1.2), and international normalized ratio (INR) (standardized prothrombin time) 3.2 units (normal = 0.8-1.2). Gastrointestinal symptoms and laboratory values gradually improved, and the patient was discharged home on day 6. Discussion Over the course of 2 weeks in December 2016, CPCS investigated 14 suspected _A. phalloides_ ingestions in 5 northern California counties. Eleven patients recovered, although 3 required liver transplants because of irreversible fulminant hepatic failure. One of those patients, a child, developed cerebral edema and suffered permanent neurologic sequelae. Amatoxins, consisting of alpha, beta, and gamma amanitin, account for greater than 90 per cent of deaths related to mushroom poisoning worldwide (1). _A. phalloides_ contains the alpha variety of amanitin, a cyclic octapeptide thought to be the primary agent of toxicity in humans (2). The amanitins are heat stable and are not inactivated by cooking. Once ingested, amatoxin is readily absorbed from the gastrointestinal tract into the portal circulation where it is taken up by hepatocytes, binding to DNA-dependent RNA polymerase (II) and halting intracellular protein synthesis, ultimately resulting in cell death (3). A lethal dose can be as low as 0.1 mg/kg, and a single mushroom can contain up to 15 mg (1). The clinical course of amatoxin poisoning is described in 3 phases: delayed gastroenteritis with significant body fluid volume loss (after a post-ingestion latency of 6-24 hours), symptomatic recovery (24-36 hours after ingestion), and fulminant hepatic and multiorgan failure (typically 3-5 days after the ingestion) (4). Patients who are evaluated early in the course of their illness might be discharged home only to return later with indications of liver failure, contributing to the relatively high case fatality rate (10-20 per cent) (5,6). Initial treatment emphasizes early supportive care including aggressive fluid and electrolyte replacement. In the event of irreversible fulminant liver failure, liver transplant might be required. A variety of therapies including multidose activated charcoal, high-dose penicillin, N-acetylcysteine, cimetidine, biliary drainage, and octreotide have been attempted with no definitive evidence of efficacy. Uncontrolled observational studies of Amanita intoxication suggest that the early use of silibinin, a milk thistle derivative, is associated with a reduction in mortality when compared with historical controls (7); however, as with the other aforementioned therapies, evidence supporting efficacy is lacking because of difficulties associated with conducting randomized controlled trials. Intravenous silibinin is licensed in Europe, and a clinical trial to evaluate its efficacy in treatment of hepatic failure induced by Amanita mushroom poisoning is currently under way in the United States. The majority of silibinin-treated patients in this report received the drug as participants of this trial. Medical providers should contact the regional poison control center or a medical toxicology consultant to assist in the management of any patient with suspected amatoxic mushroom ingestion. In California, _A. phalloides_ species grow in a symbiotic relationship with coast live oak and other hardwood trees (8). They can be especially abundant in the early wet winter months, though the foggy coastal climate and warmer temperatures can support mushroom growth throughout the year (4). In 2016, local mycologists noted an abundance of wild mushroom growth, and California county health departments reported an increase in the incidence of mushroom poisoning (9). Although weather conditions and increased numbers of _A. phalloides_ poisonings do not prove a cause and effect relationship, early seasonal rainfall and warmer subsequent temperatures made a substantial contribution to mushroom proliferation. In addition, a general increase in naive foraging and wild-crafting (that is, gathering plant material from its native environment for food or medicinal purposes) activities raises risk for poisoning. Mycologists recommend exercising caution when foraging or purchasing wild mushrooms for consumption. If wild mushrooms are to be consumed, specimens should 1st be examined, identified, and deemed edible by an experienced mycologist (4). Prompt identification of mushroom-related toxic symptoms in the ED and early, aggressive IV volume replacement are critical 1st steps in diminishing the significant morbidity and mortality associated with amatoxin ingestion. Antidotal therapies might also be considered in conjunction with a consultant experienced in hepatotoxic mushroom poisoning. In patients with severe poisoning, early contact with the nearest liver transplant center is recommended. Response to this outbreak included the notification of the local counties and state department of public health, which subsequently issued a widely distributed press release (9). Measures to disseminate information regarding the dangers of _A. phalloides_ ingestion are ongoing. [The table and references are available at the above URL. - Mod.SH] -- communicated by: ProMED-mail [Collecting wild mushrooms can be a fun and passionate hobby for some enthusiasts. But, as these articles illustrate, it can also be a deadly one. These mushrooms are extremely toxic, and you should have a mycologist with you, or take your prizes to a mycologist for accurate identification prior to consumption. So those who are willing to consume fungi should consider purchasing those specifically raised for consumption to perhaps decrease the huge negative effects of these toxic mushrooms. - Mod.TG A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  .] [", "FOODBORNE ILLNESS - PHILIPPINES (04): (METROPOLITAN MANILA) PRISONERS, FATAL, SUSPECTED SHIGELLA ************************************************************************************************ A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Sun 4 Jun 2017 Source: Filipino Star [machine trans. edited] Dirty or contaminated water was found in tests conducted on samples taken from patients affected by a diarrhea outbreak in New Bilibid Prison (NBP) in Muntinlupa City, the Department of Health (DOH). Health assistant secretary Eric Tayag reported that of 1212 inmates affected by diarrhea, 220 were hospitalized in the report, and 50 inmates remained in the hospital. The 2 fatalities were a result of dehydration and diabetes. _Shigella_ species originating from contaminated well water are reported to be the cause based on the results of the evaluation of the microbiologist. Health secretary Paulyn Ubial reviewed the collected samples sent to the Research Institute for Tropical Medicine (RITM). [byline: Ni Ludy Bermudo] -- communicated by: ProMED-mail [This report suggests that shigella bacillary dysentery was the cause of this large prison outbreak. Cholera was previously suggested to be the waterborne cause. Clinically, dysentery presents with febrile bloody diarrhea with mucus, whereas cholera generally causes little or no fever and watery \"rice water\" diarrhea. - Mod.LL A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  .] [", "AFRICAN SWINE FEVER - EUROPE (10): UKRAINE (ZAKARPATTIA) WILD BOAR, OIE *********************************************************************** A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: 2 Jun 2017 Source: OIE, WAHID, weekly disease information [edited] African swine fever (ASF), Ukraine ---------------------------------- Information received on 2 Jun 2017 from Dr Andrii Zhuk, first deputy head of the State Service of Ukraine on Food Safety and Consumer Production, International Cooperation of the State Service of Ukraine on Food Safety and Consumer Protection, UKR Ministry of Agrarian Policy and Food, KIEV, Ukraine Summary Report type: immediate notification Date of start of the event: 29 May 2017 Date of confirmation of the event: 30 May 2017 Reason for notification: reccurrence of a listed disease Date of previous occurrence: 6 Mar 2017 Manifestation of disease: clinical disease Causal agent: African swine fever virus Nature of diagnosis: laboratory (basic) This event pertains to a defined zone within the country. New outbreaks: (1) Summary of outbreaks; total outbreaks: 1 Outbreak 1: Bereguyfalo, Beregivskiy, Zakarpats'ka [Zakarpattia] Date of start of the outbreak: 29 May 2017 Outbreak status: continuing (or date resolved not provided) Epidemiological unit: not applicable Affected animals: Species / Susceptible / Cases / Deaths / Killed and disposed of / Slaughtered Wild boar; _Sus scrofa_ (Suidae) / - / 1 / 1 / 0 / 0 Affected population: a dead wild boar was found in the hunting ground. Samples were taken from the carcass, and a positive result for ASF was obtained by PCR method. The quarantine and all related measures were put in place. Epidemiology Source of the outbreak(s) or origin of infection: unknown or inconclusive Control measures Measures applied: movement control inside the country, surveillance within containment and/or protection zone, traceability, quarantine, official disposal of carcasses, by-products and waste, control of wildlife reservoirs, zoning, disinfection, ante and post-mortem inspections, vaccination permitted (if a vaccine exists), no treatment of affected animals Measures to be applied: no other measures Diagnostic test results Laboratory name and type / Species / Test / Test date / Result State Scientific and Research Institute of Laboratory Diagnosis and Veterinary and Sanitary Expertise (national laboratory) / wild boar / polymerase chain reaction (PCR) / 30 May 2017 / Positive Future reporting The event is continuing. Weekly follow-up reports will be submitted. The location of the outbreak can be seen on the interactive map included in the OIE report at the source URL above. -- communicated by: ProMED-mail [According to the media on 16 May 2017: \"The European Union will extend financial support for 2 pilot projects intended to eradicate African swine fever (ASF) in Ukraine and Moldova... The spread of the disease in Ukraine and Moldova poses a serious threat to the southern part of Poland, Slovakia, Hungary and Romania. Also, the presence of the disease in the Russian Federation and Belarus represents a continuous source of infection for the already infected EU member countries. The EU said that countries from Finland to Romania need to give political priority to the threat posed by the disease.\" See  . All outbreaks of ASF reported from 1 Jan 2015 to date (4 Jun 2017) can be seen on the interactive map at (click on the section of interest on the map, and zoom in). - Mod.CRD A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  .] [", "MERS-COV (32): SAUDI ARABIA (RIYADH, AL MADINAH) ************************************************ A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Sun 4 Jun 2017 Source: Saudi MOH 3-4 Jun 2017 [edited] As of 14:00 [2:00 PM] today [Sun 4 Jun 2017], there have been a total of: 1625 laboratory-confirmed cases of MERS-CoV infection, including 667 deaths [reported case fatality rate 41.1 per cent], 942 recoveries, and 16 currently active cases/infections. [As previously mentioned, the numbers of deaths, recoveries and currently active cases come from my spreadsheet tallies and differ from those listed on the Saudi MOH website; my spreadsheet counts asymptomatic infections. - Mod.MPP] Since the last ProMED-mail update [with information current through 2 Jun 2017], there have been a total of: 6 newly confirmed cases/infections 2 newly reported fatalities, and 0 newly reported recoveries. Information on newly confirmed cases (6 cases/infections) Date: 4 Jun 2017 (3 cases/infections) 1 - a 46 year old expat male, non-healthcare worker from Riyadh [Riyadh region] currently listed in a stable condition, having been identified as an asymptomatic contact of a confirmed MERS-CoV infected individual. Classified as a secondary hospital acquired case in a patient. 2 - a 27 year old Saudi male, healthcare worker from Riyadh [Riyadh region] currently listed in a stable condition, having been identified as an asymptomatic contact of a confirmed MERS-CoV infected individual. Classified as a secondary healthcare acquired case in a healthcare worker. 3 - a 73 year old Saudi male, non-healthcare worker from Madinah [Al Madinah region] currently listed in a stable condition. Classified as a primary case with a history of direct exposure to camels in the 14 days preceding onset of illness. Date: 3 Jun 2017 (3 cases) 4 - a 65 year old expat male, non-healthcare worker from Riyadh [Riyadh region] reported as having died at the time of initial confirmation report. Classified as a secondary hospital acquired case in a patient. 5 - a 46 year old Saudi male, non-healthcare worker from Riyadh [Riyadh region], currently listed as in a critical condition. Classification not given as high risk exposures were still under investigation. 6 - a 24 year old expat male, non-healthcare worker from Riyadh [Riyadh region] reported as having died at the time of initial confirmation report. Classified as a primary case with a history of direct contact with camels in the 14 days preceding onset of illness. Information on newly confirmed fatalities (2 fatalities) Date: 3 Jun 2017 1 - 65 year old expat male, non-healthcare worker from Riyadh [Riyadh region] with a history of pre-existing co-morbidities. [reported as a newly confirmed case on 3 Jun 2017; see case no.4 above. Classified as a secondary hospital acquired case in a patient. - Mod.MPP] 2 - 24 year old expat male, non-healthcare worker from Riyadh [Riyadh region] with no history of co-morbidities. [reported as a newly confirmed case on 3 Jun 2017; see case no.6 above. Classified as a primary case with a history of direct contact with camels in the 14 days preceding onset of illness. - Mod.MPP] -- communicated by: ProMED-mail [There was a delayed posting of the reports from 3 Jun 2017, making the reports of 6 newly confirmed cases/infections overnight a surprise. It appears that there are now reports of 10 healthcare acquired infections in Riyadh since the middle of May 2017. These 10 cases include one case in a hospital visitor, 7 cases in healthcare workers and 2 cases in patients (one of whom is a fatality). In the 1st 4 days in June 2017, there have been a total of 11 newly confirmed cases/infections with the MERS-CoV in Saudi Arabia, compared with a total of 17 newly confirmed cases/infections during the entire month of May 2017. Of these 11 cases, 9 were reported from Riyadh (7 reported as nosocomial, one under investigation, and one with history of direct contact with camels). As this period of increased incidence coincides with Ramadan, one can't help but wonder whether there has been a change in both animal husbandry, as well as in healthcare settings related to staffing. We do not know whether these nosocomial cases are from one healthcare institution, or whether they involve more than one institution. No, MERS-CoV is not disappearing the way SARS-CoV did. Maps showing the locations of the newly confirmed cases/infections can be found at the source URLs. The HealthMap/ProMED map of Saudi Arabia can be found at . - Mod.MPP A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  ,  .] [", "AVIAN INFLUENZA (110): UK, ENGLAND, POULTRY, BACKYARD, HPAI H5N8 **************************************************************** A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Sat 3 Jun 2017 Source: Farming UK [edited] The United Kingdom's deputy chief veterinary officer has confirmed H5N8 avian flu in a small flock of chickens and geese at a premises near Diss, South Norfolk. A 3-km protection zone and a 10-km surveillance zone have been put in place around the infected premises to limit the risk of the disease spreading. The flock is estimated to contain approximately 35 birds. A number have died, and the remaining live birds at the premises are being humanely culled. A full investigation is under way to determine the source of the infection. Public Health England advises that the risk to public health from the virus is very low, and the Food Standards Agency is clear that bird flu does not pose a food safety risk for UK consumers. Keepers are urged to continue to be vigilant and look out for the signs of avian flu in their flocks, informing the Animal and Plant Health Agency should they suspect infection. The government has only recently relaxed the Avian Flu Prevention Zones and a ban on poultry gatherings, which were lifted across England since 15 May 2017. The government still advises keepers to follow industry standard best practices on biosecurity, including minimising movement in and out of bird enclosures, cleaning footwear, keeping areas where birds live clean and tidy, and feeding birds indoors. Despite the outbreak today [3 Jun 2017], the most recent case of H5N8 in poultry in England was confirmed on 6-7 May 2017 in Lancashire and before that on 24 Feb 2017. In March 2017, millions of UK free range eggs temporarily lost their status after hens were forced to spend weeks inside barns as part of the government's emergency bird flu measures. -- communicated by: ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts [A risk assessment by experts at the Department for Environment Food & Rural Affairs [DEFRA] regarding the incursion of HPAI H5N8 into the UK's poultry premises during the 2017 spring to summer season (updated 11 May 2017) is available at  . As apparent from the map in annex 2 of the said document (\"Breeding mallard populations in the United Kingdom and their relative abundance\"), the breeding mallard population in the currently affected area (South Norfolk) is relatively high. HPAI H5N8 continues its circulation in Europe and elsewhere, affecting poultry and non-poultry birds, though the seasonal peak is over. The most recent OIE report involving this strain was submitted on 2 Jun 2017 by Belgium, addressing a small holding with captive birds of the Phasianidae family (unidentified); see the OIE report in http://promedmail.org/post/20170603.5081763. The event took place in the Belgian province Luxembourg (not to be confused with the country Luxembourg). Avian influenza has also been reported by the media on 2 Jun 2017 from the neighboring country, Luxembourg, where 3 poultry farms were reportedly affected (stamping out applied). The virus strain has not been disclosed. The text of the media report was, in fact, identical to the official report by Luxembourg's Ministry of Agriculture (see  ). Information on the serotyping of the causative agent is anticipated. - Mod.AS A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  .] [", "ZIKA VIRUS (11): AMERICAS, RESEARCH, OBSERVATIONS ************************************************* A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases In this update: [1] Cases in various countries: Americas Americas cumulative case numbers Caribbean --- Cuba South America --- Peru (Lima) Imported cases with no possibility of ongoing mosquito transmission --- USA: - Case numbers mainland - Territories and Commonwealth [2] IgM ELISA evaluation [3] Mechanism for neurotropism [4] CDC Guidance [5] Inhibitory plant extract ****** Cases in various countries Americas --- Americas cumulative case numbers As of 25 May 2017 Country / Locally acquired: suspected / Confirmed / Imported / Deaths / Conf. Congenital Syndrome North America: Bermuda / 0 / 0 / 6 / 0 / 0 Canada / 0 / 0 / 499 / 0 / 1 USA / 0 / 225 / 5013 / 0 / 80 Latin America: Mexico / 0 / 8772 / 15 / 0 / 5 Central American Isthmus: Belize / 1294 / 206 / 0 / 0 / 0 Costa Rica / 6396 / 1810 / 32 / 0 / 5 El Salvador / 11 521 / 51 / 0 / 0 / 4 Guatemala / 3678 / 921 / 0 / 0 / 140 Honduras / 32 130 / 302 / 0 / 0 / 4 Nicaragua / 0 / 2060 / 3 / 0 / 2 Panama / 4178 / 969 / 42 / 0 / 8 Latin Caribbean: Cuba / 0 / 187 / 58 / 0 / 0 Dominican Republic / 4906 / 345 / 0 / 0 / 93 French Guiana / 10 385 / 483 / 10 / 0 / 17 Guadeloupe / 30 845 / 382 / 0 / 0 / 18 Haiti / 2955 / 5 / 0 / 0 / 1 Martinique / 36 680 / 21 / 0 / 0 /23 Puerto Rico / 0 / 40 301 / 137 / 5 / 35 Saint Barthelemy / 990 / 61 / 0 / 0 / 0 Saint Martin / 3280 / 200 / 0 / 0 / 1 Non-Latin Caribbean: Anguilla / 29 / 23 / 1 / 0 / 0 Antigua and Barbuda / 465 / 14 / 2 / 0 / 0 Aruba / 1208 / 468 / 7 / 0 / 0 Bahamas / 0 / 25 / 3/ 0 / 0 Barbados / 705 / 150 / 0 / 0 / 1 Bonaire, St Eustatius and Saba / 235 / 381 / 0 / 0 / 0 Caymans / 232 / 31 / 10 / 0 / 0 Curacao / 2589 / 1259 / 0 / 0 / 0 Dominica / 1154 / 79 / 0 / 0 / 0 Grenada / 335 / 118 / 0 / 0 / 2 Guyana / 0 / 37 / 0 / 0 / 0 Jamaica / 7650 / 203 / 0 / 0 / 0 Montserrat / 18 / 5 / 0 / 0 / 0 Saint Kits and Nevis / 554 / 33 / 0 / 0 / 0 Saint Lucia / 822 / 50 / 0 / 0 / 0 Saint Vincent and the Grenadines / 508 / 83 / 0 / 0 / 0 Sint Maarten / 247 / 147 / 0 / 0 / 0 Suriname / 2768 / 723 / 0 / 4 / 4 Trinidad and Tobago / 0 / 718 / 1 / 0 / 3 Turks and Caicos / 201 / 25 / 3 / 0 / 0 Virgin Islands (UK) / 74 / 53 / 0 / 0 / 0 Virgin Islands (USA) / 1093 / 1026 / 2 / 0 / 0 Andean Area: Bolivia / 1767 / 585 / 4 / 0 / 14 Colombia / 98 068 / 9802 / 0 / 0 / 157 Ecuador / 3972 / 1330 / 15 / 0 / 3 Peru / 5582 / 1042 / 22 / 0 / 0 Venezuela / 59 965 / 2413 / 0 / 0 / 0 [Brazil and] Southern Cone: Brazil / 224 670 / 134 057 / 0 / 11 / 2698 Argentina / 869 / 101 / 40 / 0 / 2 Chile / 0 / 0 / 34 / 0 / 0 Paraguay / 674 / 16 / 0 / 0 / 2 Uruguay / 0 / 0 / 1 / 0 / 0 Totals, Americas / 565 692 / 212 298 / 5960 / 20 / 3323 [Maps showing the location of the affected islands and countries in the Americas mentioned above and below can be accessed at  ; North America at ; Central America ; Caribbean and South America at . - Mod.TY] Caribbean --- Cuba. 3 Jun 2017. (reported) Zika virus infections spreading in 6 provinces; Holguin reports an epidemic [no current case numbers given]. South America --- Peru (Lima). 2 Jun 2017. (conf.) 23 cases since 16 Apr 2017. [in Spanish] Imported cases with no possibility of ongoing mosquito transmission --- USA: - Case numbers mainland. Zika virus disease in the United States, 1 Jan 2017 - 31 May 2017 State / Symptomatic cases / Viremic blood donors Alabama 3 / 0 Arizona 1 / 0 Arkansas 0 / 0 California 13 / 1 Colorado 3 / 0 Connecticut 0 / 0 Delaware 0 / 0 District of Columbia 0 / 0 Florida 15 / 3 Georgia 1 / 0 Hawaii 0 / 0 Idaho 0 / 0 Illinois 4 / 0 Indiana 1 / 0 Iowa 1 / 0 Kansas 2 / 0 Kentucky 1 / 0 Louisiana 1 / 0 Maine 1 / 0 Maryland 3 / 0 Massachusetts 5 / 0 Michigan 6 / 0 Minnesota 0 / 0 Mississippi 2 / 0 Missouri 1 / 0 Montana 0 / 0 Nebraska 1 / 0 Nevada 0 / 0 New Hampshire 0 / 0 New Jersey 2 / 0 New Mexico 0 / 0 New York 24 / 1 North Carolina 3 / 0 North Dakota 0 / 0 Ohio 3 / 0 Oklahoma 0 / 0 Oregon 1 / 0 Pennsylvania 3 / 0 Rhode Island 2 / 0 South Carolina 0 / 0 South Dakota 0 / 0 Tennessee 0 / 0 Texas 10 / 1 Utah 0 / 0 Vermont 2 / 0 Virginia 3 / 0 Washington 2 / 0 West Virginia 0 / 2 Wisconsin 2 / 0 Wyoming 0 / 0 Total 123 / 8 - Territories and Commonwealth: Symptomatic / Blood donors American Samoa 3 / 0 Puerto Rico 460 / 3 US Virgin Islands 36 / 0 Total 499 / 3 [A map of the USA showing the states and territories mentioned above can be accessed at ]  -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail and Roland H\u00fcbner Superior Health Council Brussels Belgium ****** [2] IgM ELISA evaluation Date: Fri 7 Apr 2017 On Line ahead of print. Source: Diagnostic Microbiology & Infect. Dis. [edited] Kamran Kadkhoda, Ainsley Gretchen, Adrianna Racano. Evaluation of a commercially available Zika virus IgM ELISA: specificity in focus. Abstract Zika virus (ZIKV), an emerging arbovirus, has become the center of attention since it was linked to congenital abnormalities. Given the overlapping clinical picture of ZIKV disease with other infectious diseases and as an exigent public health matter, timely and reliable diagnosis of ZIKV infection is crucial. We evaluated the performance of a commercially available NS1-based ZIKV IgM ELISA. Our results showed suboptimal sensitivity within the 1st 5 days after onset while specificity remained robust. -- Communicated by: Dr. Kamran Kadkhoda Cadham Provincial Public Health Laboratory, Winnipeg, MB, Canada Departments of Medical Microbiology & Infectious Diseases, Max Rady College of Medicine, Rady Faculty of Health Sciences, University of Manitoba, Winnipeg, MB, Canada Department of Immunology, Max Rady College of Medicine, Rady Faculty of Health Sciences, University of Manitoba, Winnipeg, MB, Canada [The need for development of sensitive and specific diagnostic tests to differentiate Zika, dengue and chikungunya virus infections is urgent, especially for pregnant women and infected men who could transmit Zika virus sexually. Several tests have been developed, and their performance in the field awaits evaluation. One of the main challenges is that the majority of Zika virus infected individuals develop few or no symptoms and are unlikely to seek medical attention and undergo diagnostic testing. - Mod.TY] ****** [3] Mechanism for neurotropism Date: Thu 1 Jun 2017 Source: Science eaam9243 DOI: 10.1126/science.aam9243 [edited] Pavithra L. Chavali, Lovorka Stojic, Luke W. Meredith, Nimesh Joseph, et al. Neurodevelopmental protein Musashi 1 interacts with the Zika genome and promotes viral replication. Abstract A recent outbreak of Zika virus in Brazil has led to a simultaneous increase in reports of neonatal microcephaly. Zika targets cerebral neural precursors, a cell population essential for cortical development, but the cause of this neurotropism remains obscure. Here we report that the neural RNA-binding protein Musashi-1 (MSI1) interacts with the Zika genome and enables viral replication. Zika infection disrupts the binding of MSI1 to its endogenous targets, thereby deregulating expression of factors implicated in neural stem cell function. We further show that MSI1 is highly expressed in neural progenitors of the human embryonic brain, and is mutated in individuals with autosomal recessive primary microcephaly. Selective MSI1 expression in neural precursors could therefore explain the exceptional vulnerability of these cells to Zika infection. -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail [This report makes a significant contribution to the understanding of the mechanism of Zika virus infection on fetal brain microcephaly development. - Mod.TY] ****** [4] CDC Guidance Date: Thu 1 Jun 2017 Source: CDC Guidance [edited] Guidance for Areas with a Previous Zika Cautionary (Yellow) Designation in the Continental United States and Hawaii These recommendations provide guidance for health departments and healthcare providers caring for people with exposure to areas where the Zika cautionary (yellow) designation has been lifted. Although the level of risk of Zika virus transmission after a yellow area designation is lifted is unknown, it is likely to be low; sporadic cases may still occur. Healthcare providers should continue to evaluate pregnant women for potential exposure to Zika virus and symptoms of Zika virus disease. All women and men who live in or travel to an area that had a yellow area designation lifted should check the CDC website frequently for updates about Zika virus transmission. Recommendations for areas where the Zika cautionary (yellow) designation has been lifted: Travel - Lifting of a yellow area designation means that there are no longer precautionary travel recommendations for the area. - Healthcare providers should continue to discuss the risks of Zika for all pregnant woman with exposure to an area where the yellow designation has been lifted. Prevention Because we do not know the level of risk for local transmission in areas where a yellow designation has been lifted, CDC recommends - Pregnant women and their partners who live in or travel to these areas and who wish to reduce their risk of Zika virus infection should be counseled to consistently and correctly use condoms every time they have sex (including vaginal, anal, and oral sex) or they should not have sex during the pregnancy. Because Zika virus can persist for months in semen, there may still be a continuing risk for sexual transmission, whether or not the partner had symptoms of Zika virus infection. - Women who are not pregnant and men who travel to these areas who wish to reduce their risk of Zika virus infection should consider using condoms consistently and correctly during sex, or not having sex, to maximally reduce their risk for sexually transmitting Zika virus to the uninfected partner. Men should consider this for at least 6 months, and women should consider this for at least 8 weeks from the date the yellow designation was lifted. Please see Preconception Counseling below. In addition, all women including pregnant women and men who live in or travel to these areas should be advised to remain aware of any new reports of Zika virus transmission and should consider following steps to prevent mosquito bites [see original report at above URL] to reduce their risk for mosquito-borne illnesses, including Zika virus. Testing and Diagnosis CDC recommends Zika virus laboratory testing for the following groups: - Pregnant women, regardless of symptoms, who lived in or traveled to a previously designated yellow area between the earliest date that testing was recommended for the area and 8 weeks after the date the yellow designation was lifted and who conceived up to 8 weeks after the yellow designation was lifted. - Pregnant women who have had sex without a condom: a. With a partner who has been diagnosed with Zika virus disease. b. With a partner who lived in or traveled to a previously designated yellow area between the earliest date that testing was recommended for the area and the date the designation was lifted. In addition, consider testing pregnant women who have had sex without a condom with a partner who lived in or traveled to one of these areas while it had a yellow designation up to 6 months after the date the designation was lifted. c. With a partner who traveled to any area with risk of Zika and a CDC travel notice. - Pregnant women who have an exposure to previously designated yellow areas and who have prenatal findings suggestive of congenital Zika syndrome. - Neonates who have abnormalities consistent with congenital Zika syndrome and whose mothers have an exposure to areas with risk of Zika including previously designated yellow areas. - Anyone with an exposure to areas with risk of Zika including previously designated yellow areas who have signs and symptoms consistent with Zika virus disease. Preconception Counseling If the person has Zika symptoms and/or diagnosis: Women and men who are planning to conceive in the near future should be advised to wait at least 8 weeks after symptom onset if a woman had Zika symptoms and/or diagnosis, and at least 6 months after symptom onset if a man had Zika symptoms and/or diagnosis, before attempting conception. If the person has no Zika symptoms and does not have ongoing exposure: Women and men with an exposure to previously designated yellow areas between the earliest date that testing was recommended for the area and the date the yellow designation was lifted should consider waiting at least 8 weeks after last possible exposure if female, and at least 6 months if male, before attempting conception. If the person has no Zika symptoms and has ongoing exposure: Healthcare providers should discuss reproductive life plans with women and men who are planning to become pregnant in the near future who live in or frequently travel to previously designated yellow areas. Although the level of Zika virus transmission is likely to be low, sporadic cases may still occur. In addition, couples should consider the possible resurgence of active transmission of Zika virus during the next mosquito season in their pregnancy planning. Couples may choose not to wait or may choose to delay attempting conception depending on individual circumstances (e.g., age, fertility) and risk tolerance. Please refer to the information from the Food and Drug Administration for guidance on reducing the risk for Zika virus transmission by donated human cells, tissues, and cellular and tissue-based products, including reproductive tissues. An exposure means that a person has lived in, traveled to, or had sex without a condom with someone who lived in or traveled to a designated red or yellow area. People with ongoing exposure include those who live in or frequently travel (e.g., daily, weekly) to a red or yellow area. -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail [Although these recommendations are intended for USA residents, those living in other countries may find them useful as well. Readers interested in the additional information linked in this report may wish to consult the original report at the above URL. - Mod.TY] ****** [5] Inhibitory plant extract Date: 2 Jun 2017 Source: News.com.au [edited] Queensland researchers have found a way to kill the Zika virus using compounds found in an Australian native plant. The compounds halt the virus, which causes birth defects, and stop it replicating without damage to host mammalian cells, QUT [Queensland University of Technology] scientists say. \"The research is in the early stages, but we are aiming to ultimately synthesise the compounds in question and turn our attention to preclinical testing,\" lead researcher Dr Trudi Collet said in a statement. She didn't name the plant, presumably for commercial reasons, but said it was fairly common, and its compounds were found to kill 100 per cent of the Zika infection in cells. \"It's also exciting because of the implications of this work for other viruses. Zika, dengue, West Nile, Japanese encephalitis and yellow fever are all from the same family of viruses, flaviviridae.\" Researchers will spend the next 3-5 months working to synthesise the compounds and will then to go on to test them on the other viruses. QUT researchers have been working in collaboration with Australian-based biotech company Health Focus Products Australia. HFPA chairman and founder Dr Mark Baldock says Zika is becoming more prevalent and has been shown to remain in human sperm for 6 months. He says the breakthrough offers promise of one day being able to eliminate the virus from people who contract it in the very early stages, thereby reducing risks around conception. [Byline: Tracey Ferrier] -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail [As is pointed out in the interesting above report, this is early stages in the research. Efficacy and safety in animals will be necessary. Since 80 percent of Zika virus infections are mild or asymptomatic, affected individuals are unlikely to seek medical attention and be given the drug. However, perhaps the drug will be effective in clearing Zika virus persistence in infected men, where there is evidence of the virus genome being detectable up to 6 months in some individuals. - Mod.TY] [", "AVIAN INFLUENZA (111): SOUTH KOREA, POULTRY, HPAI H5N8, SPREAD ************************************************************** A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Mon 5 Jun 2017 18:22 KST Source: The Korea Herald [edited] Signs of a resurgence of bird flu [avian influenza, AI] are rapidly spreading across South Korea, triggering concerns over yet another possible round of the massive slaughter of poultry and ensuing hikes in egg prices. The Ministry of Agriculture, Food and Rural Affairs confirmed [Mon 5 Jun 2017] that small flocks of farm chickens on the southern island of Jeju have tested positive for the highly pathogenic H5N8 virus. The agency also said it will raise the bird flu alert to the highest level. The announcement came in response to a report by an owner of a small backyard farm [Fri 2 Jun 2017] after 8 of his chickens died. All sales of live poultry here are also banned until further notice starting [Mon 5 Jun 2017]. The government is taking prompt steps to contain the outbreak at an early stage. It had faced criticism over its tardy response that contributed to the worst-ever outbreak last year [2016]. Until health authorities closed the last case in early April [2017], 37.8 million farm birds, or 1/5 of the total poultry population [in South Korea], were culled. With then-President Park Geun-hye's duties suspended and the nation in political turmoil, the administration had failed to move quickly to stabilize the situation. \"Make sure to stop bird flu with preventive measures and remain on high alert until (the spread) is over,\" President Moon Jae said at a meeting with top secretaries and advisers, instructing Prime Minister Lee Nak-yon to oversee the issue. At least 20 farms in 6 cities and provinces are under close watch, according to ministry officials. Over 30 000 farm birds near the infected farms were slaughtered as a precaution. Amid spiraling public concern, the government and officials at the Korea Centers for Disease Control and Prevention said [Mon 5 Jun 2017] that there is very low risk that H5N8 and H5N6, common strains of bird flu, will infect humans. It is yet unclear what triggered the comeback of the virus in Gunsan [North Jeolla Province], as the country had seen no cases since 2 months ago. The government announced the de facto end of the spread of bird flu by lowering the alert level to normal [Thu 1 Jun 2017] -- just 2 days before it raised the level back again. In the wake of the latest discovery, critics argue that a full investigation should be carried out to determine the source of the infection, as well as to strengthen prevention measures. \"More investigation is needed in terms of the source of the infection, but it's highly likely that the recent outbreak is attributed to viruses that have remained inside (infected farm birds),\" Kim Jae-hong, a professor of veterinary medicine at Seoul National University, told The Korea Herald. The infected areas include Gunsan, the country's southwestern region, which had possibly shipped out infected chickens and ducks to more farms including Paju, Gyeonggi [Gyeonggi Province], and Yangsan [South Gyeongsang province], and possibly to more areas not reported yet. Authorities are working to identify those areas to limit the spread of the virus. Kim added that the government's \"hasty decision\" to lower the alert level last week [week of 29 May 2017] was partly to blame for the re-emergence of bird flu, with many unauthorized backyard farms in individual households distributing poultry from and to local farmers. The lack of preventive measures for AI, despite its outbreak being almost an annual event since 2003, is another issue that should be addressed, critics say. \"Our prevention system relies too much on farmers' reports to the authority with insufficient measures to detect the course of the virus in advance,\" Seo Sang-heui, a veterinary medicine professor at Chungnam National University, said in an interview with a local news outlet. [Byline: Bak Se-hwan] -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail [The HPAI strains reported from South Korea in recent years are H5N8 and H5N6. According to OIE's data, HPAI H5N1 was last reported from South Korea in 2011; this strain was reported from North Korea in 2014. According to a new update, an additional outbreak has been discovered on a poultry farm in the port city of Busan. The virus was, reportedly, introduced from the Gunsan region (in North Jeolla province). This may reflect the rapid spread of this epizootic. See report at  . - Mod.AS Maps of South Korea can be seen at and  . - Sr.Tech.Ed.MJ] [", "EBOLA UPDATE (27): NEWS, VACCINE ******************************** A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases In this update: [1] News Tanzania - Challenge from undocumented immigrants Sierra Leone - Ebola nurse returns - BSL-3 laboratory Congo DR - MOH: outbreak over - Radio network warning and tracking system [2] Vaccine Congo DR - Vaccine trial - Authorities holding off deployment of experimental vaccine - Opinion piece on vaccine development ****** [1] News Tanzania -------- 29 May 2017 Tanzania: Health Minister fears Ebola coming in through undocumented immigrants [Tanzania Police force has been urged to strengthen security at the borders as a way of managing undocumented immigrants and in turn, prevent [Ebola virus disease (EVD)] from entering the country. Speaking to reporters at a press event today [29 May 2017], Health minister, Ms Ummy Mwalimu, said undocumented immigration was the key challenge facing the government in combating [EVD]. \"There are some people who are entering the country illegally. This is hard for us when it comes to monitoring the actual number of people who are entering the country. I am afraid that people who are affected with Ebola might as well come in without being screened,\" she said.] ... Sierra Leone ------------ 30 May 2017: Ebola nurse [PC] returns to Sierra Leone for the 1st time after contracting disease [in the 2014 Ebola virus disease outbreak], to get 'closure'. [She] says despite her horrific ordeal, it was worth it after meeting the teenage girl she saved while volunteering in the West African country.] ... 1 Jun 2017 Sierra Leone: P3 biosafety lab has been a success - Dr Song [Team leader of the Chinese CDC, Dr Jingdong Song, working at the P3 Biosafety lab in Jui [Western Area of Sierra Leone, just outside the capital Freetown], has said that since the Chinese government built the lab in Sierra Leone, it has been very successful and has been working to develop the health system in the country. Dr Song said they came in December [2016] and they will be leaving on [28 Jun 2017]. He said 5 of them were sent from China and they have been doing Ebola, Zika, yellow fever, and monkeypox testing. 'We are now trying to establish [Lassa virus (LASV)] detection and we have already spoken with Ministry of Health officials to start doing it here. The only lab doing it is in Kenema [Eastern Province of Sierra Leone] and it is far from the city. It takes time to go and it can be dangerous, so that is the reason why we want to start doing it at Jui.\" Dr Song said they have been testing [Ebola virus disease (EVD)] survivors along with [Center for Disease Control], MOHS [Ministry of Health and Sanitation] and [World Health Organization]. He said they have done 54 tests and all of them have proved negative. He also said they conduct routine Ebola detection tests on new patients. They have done 94 tests and all were negative. \"Also we have done 45 yellow fever tests and 4 tests for monkeypox and all of them were negative. We are happy that these tests were all negative because it shows that Sierra Leoneans are safe to travel and the country is safe for investment.\" Dr Song said since they arrived they have also been giving lectures to staff and doing training for all so that all of them will continue to develop their skills. The team leader said they have been working with 4 Sierra Leonean staff [who have] been exceptional in their job. He said they are doing all they can to make sure they are given scholarships to go to China and continue to specialize so that they will be able to take over the lab. \"The next team coming will work on the West Africa Tropical Research centre and they will be working for 3 years to get it done. That lab will help us build confidence between our 2 nations when we travel and do business. Also it will help develop the sub-region in tropical diseases and combat them at the earliest stage. Talking to Mr Kamara, who has been working in the lab since 2015, he said he went to China for 6 weeks training with his colleagues and they have been working very well. \"Now we can work independently as we have been trained well. The Chinese teams that we have been working with over the years have been excellent and they have trained us to be professionals. We do hope to continue our studies in the future. The 5 Chinese doctors working in the lab are Dr Jingdong Song, the team leader, Dr Lian Xu Xia, Dr Fei Ye, Dr Yi Zhang, and Dr Lingwei Zhu. The local staff in the lab are Idrissa Laybor Kamara, Sheku Mustapha Koroma, Ali Brima Tia, and Aminata Brima Daramy.] [It is an excellent idea to have staff undergoing training now to prepare for future medical emergencies when outbreaks of not only Ebola, but also other dangerous viruses such as Lassa and yellow fever, may occur. - Mod.LK] Congo DR -------- 2 Jun 2017: Democratic Republic of Congo health minister says Ebola outbreak under control [DR Congo's health minister says there have been no new confirmed cases of Ebola and the outbreak has been controlled. Health Minister Oly Ilunga Kalenga said on [Fri 2 Jun 2017] no new cases of the deadly virus have been confirmed in the Likati zone for more than 21 days, the maximum incubation period. However, he says experimental vaccines to fight the virus have not yet arrived. Likati is some 1400 kilometers (870 miles) from Congo's capital, Kinshasa. The World Health Organization says 3 deaths have been blamed on the virus since it emerged [11 May 2017] in Congo's far north. Only 2 have been laboratory-confirmed as Ebola. WHO says this was the 8th outbreak in Congo since 1976. Congo has a long track record with the hemorrhagic fever.] 2 Jun 2017: For remote African villages, radio network both warns of attacks and tracks Ebola [In a remote region where bridges are often little more than a couple of felled trees and motorcycles are the fastest way to get around, a network of solar-powered radios is doing double duty: warning of imminent extremist attacks, as well as keeping tabs on [Ebola virus disease (EVD)] outbreaks. The network of FM and high-frequency radios in the Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC) has been growing since 2012 with funding from the US Agency for International Development [USAID], according to aid workers. It came in handy in May [2017], when EVD killed at least 3 people in an extremely remote region where there are almost no roads, no telephones, and no internet. 2 days after the 1st case was confirmed on [11 May 2017], radio operators started transmitting warnings, Catholic Relief Services said. \"There is an epidemic of Ebola,\" they said. \"It is real and it is near our villages. If a member of your family or neighbor in our community has fever, fatigue, vomits blood, has diarrhea with blood, or blood coming from the nose, do not touch it and notify the nearest health team.\" The broadcasts include advice on wearing protective equipment. \"We were the first to report the outbreak of the disease to the humanitarian community,\" said Driss Moumane of Catholic Relief Services (CRS), who designed the system.] ... ****** [2] Vaccine 29 May 2017: Congo DR authorizes trial of experimental Ebola vaccine [The Democratic Republic of Congo has approved using an experimental Ebola vaccine to combat an outbreak of the virus in the northeast, the government said Mon 29 May 2017. \"The DRC accepts the use of vaccines against the [Ebola virus disease (EVD)],\" a source in the health ministry told AFP [Agence France-Presse], adding that the government concluded it had no objections to the tests being conducted in the country. \"We're waiting for an operational plan from our partners which will determine what steps need to be taken, in which geographic areas we could vaccinate,\" the source added, on condition of anonymity. A definitive decision on how the vaccine would be deployed will be released in 24 hours, the source said. There is no licensed vaccine for the Ebola virus, but the World Health Organization said this month [May 2017] that a promising candidate vaccine exists and could be deployed within a matter of days if the DR Congo government gave its approval.] ... [It will be difficult to test vaccine efficacy with the outbreak under control, as has been declared by the Health Minister. - Mod.LK] 2 Jun 2017: Authorities holding off deployment of experimental Ebola vaccine in Congo [International health authorities and the Democratic Republic of the Congo are holding off on deploying an experimental Ebola vaccine to the site of the country's latest outbreak of the virus, indicating that it may now not be needed. In a statement [Thu 1 Jun 2017], medical-aid organization Doctors Without Borders said that preparations are under way for vaccination in Congo, but suggested that it will be used only if a new Ebola case arises.] ... [As I commented earlier, it would be difficult to show efficacy of the vaccine at this time, and it appears not to be needed. This outbreak of Ebola in the DRC was well contained, mostly likely a consequence of the remoteness of the region, the expertise of the health care workers, and the experience of the population with EVD. - Mod.LK] 30 May 2016: Ebola strikes back in the DRC (opinion piece on vaccine development) [Western governments need to realize that to completely rely on the for-profit pharmaceutical sector to drive the process to develop vaccines will be disastrous for public health. Just when you thought it was safe to go back to the African subcontinent, [Ebola virus disease (EVD] strikes back. The World Health Organization (WHO) confirmed that a new outbreak of the disease had occurred in the Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC) on [12 May 2017]. On [21 May 2017], it revealed that a 4th person -- one of the 43 believed to have been affected and the 400 now being tracked as potential patients -- was believed to have died as a result of the virus. However, unlike the chaos that surrounded the 1st Ebola outbreak, the authorities seem largely in control. Despite the significant logistical challenge of getting the right medical help deep into the jungles of the Democratic Republic of Congo, Matshidiso Rebecca Moeti, the WHO Regional Director for Africa says that she is \"optimistic\" that the outbreak can be halted quickly. She also notes that WHO Africa has learned lessons from the last outbreak to become a \"more responsive, accountable, effective, and transparent organization.\" This time, doctors are coming armed with the rVSV-ZEBOV vaccine candidate, developed by pharmaceutical giant Merck. The drug is slated to be 100 percent effective against one of the 5 strands of the virus and has demonstrated \"compelling results\" in previous trials, but it has not been licensed yet. Undeterred by this minor detail, the WHO has 300 000 doses on hand and Moeti as indicated that the WHO \"could potentially mount a campaign within a week if all of the conditions are met and personnel, financing and logistics are in place.\" And on [23 May 2017] the DRC submitted a formal vaccine trial protocol to an ethical review board, the 1st step towards deploying the vaccine. Recent reports have cast a long shadow over Merck's vaccine. Indeed, the US National Academy of Medicine has challenged the methodology of the 4160-patient clinical trial and made the lukewarm statement that while the vaccine \"most likely provides some protection to recipients,\" the protection \"could in reality be quite low\". Not only is the vaccine ineffective against 4 [strains] of the Ebola virus [It is effective against the Zaire strain, but it is ineffective against the strains of Sudan and Bundibugyo. - Mod.LK], but also it might be altogether useless on people with compromised immune systems (HIV positive) [but this is the case for many vaccines. - Mod.LK] or pregnant women. Luckily, the Merck vaccine is just one of several candidates now in different phases of development. Among the most promising is GSK's [GlaxoSmithKline] cAd3-ZEBOV vaccine, with the company touting \"very encouraging\" findings after the 1st tests, albeit with the caveat that it will only be available in the 2nd half of 2018. And earlier in May [2017], scientists at New York's Albert Einstein College of Medicine have also indicated that they have identified 2 antibodies -- ADI-15878 and ADI-15742 -- that they believe will be able to thwart the 5 known Ebola viruses. Johnson and Johnson is developing a 2-dose vaccination approach, while China has also thrown down the gauntlet and is working on the Ad5-EBOV vaccine, based on work done by a Chinese military research unit.] ... [Byline: Amanda Clarkson] [There are no vaccines registered for Ebola yet, but the vaccine rVSV-ZEBOV developed by the Merck laboratory is considered the most promising one according to the WHO. In a statement dated December 2016, the organization explained that it had been \"studied in a trial involving 11 841 people in Guinea during the year 2015\" and that \"among the 5837 subjects who received the vaccine, no case of Ebola had been recorded 10 days or more after vaccination\" [excerpted from  submitted by Roland H\u00fcbner  and machine translated by SH - Mod.LK] [Compiled by: Celeste Whitlow ] -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail [A map of the affected area in north east Congo DR can be seen at  / and a HealthMap/ProMED-mail map of Congo DR at  . - Mod.LK] [", "TILAPIA SYNCYTIAL HEPATITIS - ISRAEL (02): (HAZAFON) EMERGING DISEASE, OIE, FOLLOW-UP ************************************************************************************* A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Sun 4 Jun 2017 Source: Israel Veterinary Services & Animal Health official website [summ., edited] Tilapia lake virus [TiLV] - follow-up report no. 1 ------------------------------------------------- [We present some comments from the follow-up report; for the full text, and a map showing the 2 clusters, please refer to the source URL above. - Mod.AS] Agent: Tilapia lake virus Date of start of the event: 01 Aug 2011 Date of confirmation of the event: 01 Mar 2014 Reason: emerging disease Date of immediate notification: 21 May 2017 Follow-up report no. 1: Affected population: TiLV outbreaks in pond-cultured tilapines (mainly tilapia hybrids) were diagnosed in approximately 15 farms located in the Jordan valley. Massive outbreaks are (typically) season-dependent: high water temperatures (full summer) are predisposing [(either by favoring viral replication or by weakening fish (low oxygen etc)]. These episodes were recorded in fish weighting over 60 grams (over 10 months of age). Involvement of juveniles cannot be excluded, but due to culture systems (green water), these cannot be promptly observed. Clinical symptoms include lethargy, erratic swimming, ocular lesions and skin ulcerations. Epidemiological comments: Tilapia lake virus (TiLV) outbreaks are recorded mostly during the hot season (July-October). Outbreaks occurring in other periods are rare. In aquaculture systems, morbidity and mortality includes fish over 60 grams, although involvement of small fish is not excluded. Diagnostic test results Laboratory name and type: Kimron Veterinary Institute, Fish diseases laboratory (national laboratory) Species / Test type / Result Tilapines (tilapia) / polymerase chain reaction (PCR) / Positive Tilapines (tilapia) / pathogen isolation on cell culture / Positive -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail [OIE's disease card on the emerging 'Tilapia lake virus\" (TiLV) is available at  . Article 4 in the said card addresses the geographic distribution as follows (references excluded): \"TiLV has been reported in Colombia, Ecuador, and Israel and most recently, Egypt and Thailand. However, a lack of thorough investigation of all mortality incidents means that the geographic distribution of TiLV may be wider than currently [reported]. For example, reports of mortality in tilapia in Ghana and Zambia in 2016 have not been attributed to TiLV but the available information does not indicate that the presence of the virus has been investigated. A partial genome from Thailand showed relatively high variation to strains from Israel (around 97 percent nucleotide identity).\" On 26 May 2017, the FAO published an exhaustive special global alert (no. 338) addressing Tilapia lake virus; the document (6 pages) is available at . The initial notification of the disease to the OIE was titled, in OIE's WAHID publication, as \"Tilapia syncytial hepatitis\" while the current follow-up report has been submitted by Israel under the title \"Tilapia lake virus\", similar to the title of OIE's relevant disease card. For consistency, ProMED-mail's thread bears the original title (Tilapia syncytial hepatitis). Reporting of this emerging fish disease from other affected countries is pending. - Mod.AS A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  .] [", "ANTHRAX - BANGLADESH: (RAJSHAHI) BOVINE, HUMAN ********************************************** A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Mon 5 Jun 2017 9:00 PM BST Source: Dhaka Tribune [edited] At least 7 people have been confirmed as infected with anthrax in Pabna's Bhangpur upazila [sub district, Rajshahi Division] after eating contaminated meat. The victims have been identified as NI, 28; B, 25; SA, 35; B, 40; S, 35; S, 28; and M, 30, reports UNB. All of them are involved in cattle trading. Upazila Health Complex's Health and Family Planning Officer Md Shahadat Hossain said they had taken \"necessary measures\" in this regard. Anthrax is a potentially deadly infectious disease caused by exposure to the bacterium _Bacillus anthracis_. The bacterium most commonly affects hoofed animals, but people who come in contact with the spores can also become infected. Infected people suffer fever, severe pain, and swollen tissues, often with lesions. The disease can be deadly if not treated immediately. Locals said that on [Fri 2 Jun 2017] a cow of neighbouring village in Faridpur upazila [Dhaka Division] was slaughtered after it had fallen sick. Later in the day, 7 people of Haropara village ate the tainted meat. Several hours later they fell sick, with blisters on their hands and legs, and complained of pain. -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail [Pabna District is a district in north western Bangladesh. It is the southernmost district of Rajshahi Division. Its administrative capital is eponymous Pabna town; see  . Rajshahi saw many outbreaks in 2016. It is informative that the 7 cases came from Bhangpur upazila but the affected cow was slaughtered and butchered in Faridpur upazila (village) of Dhaka Division. Presumably, from the description of the cutaneous lesions on hands and legs, they were Haropara relatives of the Faridpur owner of the cow, and came over to help slaughter and butcher it. Logically we can therefore expect to see reports of further human cases in Faridpur and maybe other villages that purchased some of this contaminated meat. And where there is one cow with anthrax, there will be others in Faridpur, and certainly the other cattle in this village need to be vaccinated as soon as possible, if not yesterday. - Mod.MHJ Maps of Bangladesh can be seen at and . - Sr.Tech.Ed.MJ] [", "RIFT VALLEY FEVER - MAURITANIA: REQUEST FOR INFORMATION ******************************************************** A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Sat 3 Jun 2017, 11:08 AM Source: Alakhbar [in French, trans. Mod.AB, edited] A suspected case of Rift Valley fever (RVF) was discovered at the Nouakchott Hospital Center according to a source for Alakhbar. The patient is a 37-year-old Mauritanian. He was isolated upon his arrival at the hospital after the 1st medical tests revealed the existence of fever. Further in-depth analyzes are required for confirmation. The Mauritanian health authorities have often denied the existence of the virus in its 1st appearances. RVF is a disease that mainly affects animals but can contaminate humans either by mosquito bites or by contact with blood, physiological fluids, or organs of infected animals. The RVF virus was 1st identified in 1931 during an investigation of an epidemic affecting sheep in a Rift Valley farm in Kenya. -- Communicated by: ProMED-MENA [If this case were to be definitively confirmed in the laboratory, it would have occurred almost 18 months after the series of cases, including 4 fatal cases, which Mauritania had experienced over various provinces in October 2015. At the same time, at least 4 foci of the disease occurred in sheep and goats in Brakna region (Aleg, Tidjikja, Magta-Lahjar, Kiffa). The recent episode of RVF in Niger (September 2016 to February 2017) could be the cause of the re-emergence of the disease in Mauritania because, although these 2 countries do not share a common border, there is an incessant movement of livestock between the different areas of the Sahel where nomadism is a widespread lifestyle. It would appear that veterinary surveillance in these areas is sub-optimal, and this would explain why the detection of human cases precedes that of animal cases at the origin of these cases. - Mod.AB RVF virus likely is endemic in parts of Mauritania, with cases of human and domestic animals occurring sporadically there. Mod AS provided an excellent comment on RVF previously; \"Rift Valley fever (RVF) is a peracute or acute zoonotic disease of domestic ruminants. It is caused by a single serotype of a mosquito-borne virus of the _Bunyaviridae_ family (genus _Phlebovirus_). The disease occurs in climatic conditions favouring the breeding of mosquito vectors and is characterised by abortion, neonatal mortality, and liver damage. The disease is most severe in sheep, goats and cattle. Older, non-pregnant animals, although susceptible to infection, are more resistant to clinical disease. There is considerable variation in the susceptibility to RVF of animals of different species. Camels usually have an inapparent infection with RVF virus (RVFV), but sudden mortality, neonatal mortality, and abortion occur, and abortion rates can be as high as in cattle. \"Humans are susceptible to RVFV and are infected through contact with infected animal material (body fluids or tissues) or through bites from infected mosquitoes. RVFV has also caused serious infections in laboratory workers and must be handled with biosafety and biocontainment measures. It is recommended that laboratory workers be vaccinated if possible. \"RVFV is endemic in many African countries and may involve several countries in the region at the same time or progressively expand geographically over the course of a few years. In addition to Africa, large outbreaks have been observed in the Arabian Peninsula and some Indian Ocean Islands. These generally, but not exclusively, follow the periodic cycles of unusually heavy rainfall, which may occur at intervals of several years, or the flooding of wide areas favouring the proliferation of mosquitoes. \"Rainfall facilitates mosquito eggs to hatch. _Aedes_ mosquitoes acquire the virus from feeding on infected animals and may potentially vertically transmit the virus so that new generations of infected mosquitoes may hatch from their eggs. This provides a potential mechanism for maintaining the virus in nature, as the eggs of these mosquitoes may survive for periods of up to several years in dry conditions. Once livestock is infected, a wide variety of mosquito species may act as the vector for transmission of RVFV and can spread the disease. \"Low level RVF activity may take place during inter-epizootic periods. RVF should be suspected when exceptional flooding and subsequent abundant mosquito populations are followed by the occurrence of abortions, together with fatal disease marked by necrosis and haemorrhages in the liver that particularly affect newborn lambs, kids and calves, potentially concurrent with the occurrence of an influenza-like illness in farm workers and people handling raw meat. \"During an outbreak, preventive measures to protect workers from infection should be employed when there are suspicions that RVFV-infected animals or animal products are to be handled. \"The above and much more information is available at  .\" ProMED would appreciate receiving additional information including laboratory results about this case and any new ones that might appear as they become available, in addition to information on presumed location of infection as the diagnosis was made in the capital city, but no mention of where the individual came from. - Mod.TY A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  . A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  .] [", "MENINGITIS, MENINGOCOCCAL - NIGERIA (10): FATAL, SEROGROUP C ************************************************************ A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Sun 4 June 2017 Source: Outbreak News Today [edited] Since our last report on May 22 [2017], nearly 2 weeks ago, Nigerian health officials have reported an additional 468 meningococcal meningitis cases, including 44 deaths. According to the Nigeria Centre for Disease Control (NCDC), from the beginning of the outbreak on [13 Dec 2016] to [2 Jun 2017], a total of 14 473 suspected cases and 1155 deaths (CFR [case fatality rate] of 8 percent) of meningitis have been reported from 25 States. As many as 460 cases have been confirmed and 8 out of 10 confirmed cases were identified as _Neisseria meningitidis_ serogroup C. A second phase of reactive vaccination was completed in Zamfara state on [26 May 2017] with 97 percent coverage and in Yobe state on [ 24 May 2017] with 105 percent coverage. Meningococcal meningitis is a bacterial form of meningitis, a serious infection of the thin lining that surrounds the brain and spinal cord and can cause severe brain damage. Meningococcal meningitis is fatal in [greater than] 50 percent of cases if untreated. Though cases of meningitis occur throughout the world, large, recurring epidemics affect an extensive region of sub-Saharan Africa known as the \"meningitis belt\" which includes 26 countries from Senegal in the west to Ethiopia in the east. [Byline: Robert Herriman] -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts [Discussions of the current meningococcal meningitis outbreak in Nigeria can be found in the following prior ProMED-mail posts: Meningitis, meningococcal - Nigeria (04): mass vaccination, comments http://promedmail.org/post/20170403.4944602 Meningitis, meningococcal - Nigeria (03): fatal, more states, vaccine short, RFI http://promedmail.org/post/20170402.4942532 Meningitis, meningococcal - Nigeria (02): fatal, emergence sg C, WHO http://promedmail.org/post/20170325.4925882 Meningitis, meningococcal - Nigeria: (SO, ZA) fatal, new sg.susp., RFI http://promedmail.org/post/20170318.4909903. - Mod.ML A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  .] [", "CHOLERA, DIARRHEA AND DYSENTERY UPDATE (45): ASIA (YEMEN) ********************************************************* A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Mon 5 Jun 2017 Source: Anadolu Agency [edited] At least 676 people have died since a cholera epidemic broke out in war-torn Yemen in late April [2017], according to the WHO. In a Twitter post on [Mon 5 Jun 2017], WHO said more than 86 400 suspected cases of cholera had been registered in 19 Yemeni provinces. International organizations -- including the WHO, UNICEF, and the International Committee of the Red Cross -- have recently stepped up the delivery of medical supplies to Yemen, where local health authorities are struggling to cope with the outbreak. Yemen has fallen into civil war in 2014 after Houthi rebels overran capital Sana'a and other provinces. In 2015, Saudi Arabia and its Arab allies launched a massive air campaign aimed at reversing Houthi gains and shoring up Yemen's Saudi-backed government. [Byline: Mohammed al-Samei] -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail [The statistics of the ongoing epidemic in Yemen in 2017 are: Date (2017) / Cases / Deaths 8 May / 1360 / 25 11 May / 2752 / 51 13 May / 8595 / 115 14 May / 11 000 / 180 17 May / 17 200 / 209 19 May / 23 500 / 242 21 May / 29 300 / 315 22 May / 35 217 / 361 24 May / 42 207 / 420 27 May / 51 832 / 471 30 May / 65 300 / 532 2 Jun / 73 700 / 605 4 Jun / 86 400 / 676 - Mod.LL A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  .] [", "PERTUSSIS (05): NEW ZEALAND, USA, AUSTRALIA, SPAIN ************************************************** A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases In this update: [1] Otago, New Zealand [2] Webster County, Missouri, USA [3] Louisiana, USA [4] Cairns, Queensland, Australia [5] South Australia, Australia ****** [1] Otago, New Zealand Date: Mon 22 May 2017 Source: Otago Daily Times [edited] A spike in pertussis in Central Otago may be due to greater awareness or part of a national cycle, Southern District Health Board (SDHB) medical officer of health Dr Naomi Gough says. Notifications of suspected pertussis, also known as whooping cough, and confirmed cases in Central Otago had both increased since about March [2017], Dr Gough said. She said in Otago there would normally be 3 or 4 notifications of suspected pertussis, which typically included 1 or 2 confirmed cases, every week. In the past 3 weeks there had been 25 notifications of possible pertussis in Central Otago, of which 6 were confirmed. Most of those were from people who had in fact been sick about a month ago, and the spike had now settled, Dr Gough said. There had also been a spike in Central Otago in March [2017], and in Dunedin and Invercargill earlier in the year [2017]. There had been no increase in pertussis this year in Queenstown or Wanaka. Dr Gough said the reasons for the increase could be twofold. The first group of reasons was increased awareness of pertussis, the SDHB asking GPs to report all cases of suspected pertussis, and improvement in the testing for pertussis. Secondly, there seemed to be a 4-yearly cycle of pertussis outbreaks nationally. The last significant outbreak in Central Otago was about 4 years ago, Dr Gough said. She said it was important to note pertussis was always in the community and its circulation and spikes were normal, although the SDHB was increasingly noticing clusters of pertussis in communities. But it was also important to remember how highly contagious the bacterial infection was, and the importance of taking adequate measures if someone got sick with it. People with pertussis were typically contagious for about 3 weeks and could be prescribed a 5-day course of antibiotics. They were advised to stay at home until they had finished taking the antibiotics. It could be ''annoying'' to have to stay at home, but whooping cough was very dangerous to young unimmunised babies and to older people and those who were undergoing chemotherapy or had otherwise compromised immune systems, Dr Gough said. She said some people with pertussis had only minor coughing and might not realise they had the disease. She recommended families check their immunisations were up-to-date, and also consider getting influenza vaccinations. [Byline: Pam Jones] -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts [Otago is a region of New Zealand in the south of the South Island; Central Otago is an informal name for the inland part of the Otago region . A map of New Zealand showing the location of Otago can be found at:  . - Mod.ML] ****** [2] Webster County, Missouri, USA Date: Mon 22 May 2017, 5:35 PM Source: KY3 News [edited] Two babies are hospitalized from an outbreak of whooping cough in the Amish community in Webster County. County health officials now are trying to control the spread of the disease. The whooping cough outbreak has been going on for at least a couple of weeks in the Amish community near Seymour, even leading to the hospitalization of 2 babies. A total of 6 cases are confirmed, while there are many more possible cases in the Amish community along Highway C. \"The challenge came because you have to go to them; they don't really have the means to hear or see about it through the news, the media,\" said Banks. The Webster County Health Unit used word of mouth and set up an immunization clinic at a country store last week. In 2 days, they vaccinated more than 300 adults and children. \"We're hoping that our actions and our control measures really counteracted against the spread of it. They told us what was going on,\" said Banks. Pharmacist Rebecca Kime at Downtown Drug in Seymour started hearing the signature cough about a week ago. \"Yep, we have; a lot of Purell, lot of Lysol wipe-downs,\" said Kime. At Downtown Drug, the antibiotic used to treat whooping cough has been flying out the door. Just in the past week, they've handed out about 200 prescriptions for azithromycin. \"They also were treating all the children in the family, and sometimes you've got 13, 14 kids in a family,\" said Kime. The favored herbal treatment has also sold out. So far, no confirmed cases are outside the Amish community, and health officials have not even seen any cases in the Amish community along Highway A. [Byline: Linda Russell, Tim Leimkuhler] -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts [The Amish settled in Webster County in 1968, acquiring many old rundown farms . They are engaged in farming, as well as construction and produce sales  . The Missouri Amish population is now North America's 7th-largest, with over 9000 Amish. The area near the town of Seymour in Webster County, with a population of about 1500 is the largest community of Amish in Missouri. Amish are not totally averse to childhood immunizations. In a survey of Amish families in Ohio in 2007, among the 359 respondents, \"85 percent of Amish parents surveyed accept some immunizations\" and \"only 14 percent of the parents reported that none of their children had received immunizations. As many as 85 percent of the parents who completely exempted their children from vaccines stated that the main reason they do not vaccinate their children is concern over adverse effects. Many parents indicated that they allow their children to receive only some vaccines because of their concern about the way certain vaccines are produced  .\" - Mod.ML] ****** [3] Louisiana, USA Date: Thu 1 Jun 2017 Source: KPLC TV [edited] A highly contagious respiratory disease known for its distinctive cough is what's going around this week. A recent handful of cases of whooping cough in local children is concerning in the medical community. \"We're definitely seeing an increase in identified cases,\" said Lake Charles Memorial Health System infection preventionist, Bridget Redlich. -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts ****** [4] Cairns, Queensland, Australia Date: Tue 23 may 2017, 3:00pm Source: The Cairns Post [edited] Parents of children who have contracted whooping cough are blaming authorities for not doing enough to warn the public about an outbreak of the highly infectious disease in a Cairns suburb. A total of 3 people have been confirmed with whooping cough at Gordonvale, including 2 students of Gordonvale State School, who became infected several weeks ago. The school, however, only advised its community about 1 of the cases in its latest newsletter yesterday [Mon 22 May 2017]. Both students, who are recovering at home, were vaccinated against the airborne bacterial disease at early ages. There have been 45 cases of whooping cough or pertussis in the Cairns health district since the start of the year [2017], compared to a yearly average of 86 cases. Cairns Tropical Public Health Services director Dr Richard Gair said information about whooping cough had been distributed to the school and a letter provided for distribution to families. However, he said national guidelines for responding to a whooping cough case did not focus on a community-wide response, such as that relevant to dengue fever or the Zika virus, with the response instead targeting follow-up of \"close risk contacts\". A Department of Education and Training spokesman said the principal of Gordonvale State advised parents and carers yesterday about a confirmed case of whooping cough. [Byline: Daniel Bateman] -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts [Cairns, with a population of 147 993 residents, is a major city on the east coast of Far North Queensland in Australia  . A map of Australia showing the location of Cairns can be found at:  . - Mod.ML] ****** [5] South Australia, Australia Date: Tue 23 May 2017, 3:26 PM Source: Port Lincoln Times [edited] Recent figures suggest a whooping cough epidemic could be on the way, with Port Lincoln doctors seeing several cases of the virus in babies and families. There have already been 648 confirmed cases of whooping cough in South Australia in 2017, the highest year-to-date cases for more than 5 years. This time last year [2016] there were 452 cases, compared to just 168 cases in 2014. The whooping cough vaccine wears off after 4 to 5 years, and those who are in contact with babies are especially encouraged to get their booster shot. Lincoln Medical Centre general practitioner Dr Simon Lathlean said he encouraged anyone in contact with babies under 12 months of age to ensure their boosters were up to date. -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts [Port Lincoln, with a population of 16 147 residents, is the largest city in the West Coast region, approximately 280 km west of the Adelaide in the Australian state of South Australia  . A map of Australia showing the location of Port Lincoln can be found at:  . - Mod.ML] ****** [6] Spain Date: Thu 1 June 2017 Source: Eurosurveillance, Volume 22, Issue 22 [edited] A case-control study to assess the effectiveness of pertussis vaccination during pregnancy on newborns, Valencian community, Spain, 1 March 2015 to 29 February 2016. -------------------------------------------------------------------------------- Bellido-Blasco J, Guiral-Rodrigo S, Miguez-Santiyan A, Salazar-Cifre A, Gonzalez-Moran F. Abstract -------- \"In the Valencian Community (Spain), the programme of maternal pertussis vaccination during pregnancy started in January 2015. The objective of this study was to estimate in this region the vaccine effectiveness (VE) in protecting newborns against laboratory-confirmed pertussis infection. A matched case-control study was undertaken in the period between [1 Mar 2015] and [29 Feb 2016]. A total of 22 cases and 66 controls (plus or less 15 days of age difference) were included in the study. Cases were non-vaccinated infants less than 3 months of age at disease onset testing positive for pertussis by real-time PCR. For every case 3 unvaccinated controls were selected. Odds ratios (OR) were calculated by multiple conditional logistic regression for association between maternal vaccination and infant pertussis. Other children in the household, as well as mother- and environmental covariates were taken into account. The VE was calculated as 1 minus OR. Mothers of 5 cases (23 percent) and of 41 controls (62 percent) were vaccinated during pregnancy. The adjusted VE was 90.9 percent (95 percent confidence interval (CI): 56.6 to 98.1). The only covariate in the final model was breastfeeding (protective effect). Our study provides evidence in favour of pertussis vaccination programmes for pregnant women in order to prevent whooping cough in infants aged less than 3 months.\" -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail [For a discussion of pertussis, please see my moderator comments in ProMED-mail post Pertussis - USA: (CA) fatal http://promedmail.org/post/20150115.3093551 and my colleague Mod.LL's comments in Pertussis - USA (06) http://promedmail.org/post/20160917.4495935. - Mod.ML] [", "ANTHRAX - BANGLADESH (02): (RAJSHAHI) BOVINE, HUMAN DEATH ********************************************************* A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Tue 6 Jun 2017, 12:00 AM Source: The Daily Star [edited] At least 25 people have been infected with Anthrax in Faridpur upazila of the district in the last 3 days. Of them, 1 died at Rajshahi Medical College Hospital on [Fri 2 Jun 2017]. Doctors, however, could not confirm whether it was caused by Anthrax or other disease. The deceased a [12 year-old boy from] Jantihar village. He took part in the slaughtering of a diseased cow in the village last week, said family members. Anthrax outbreaks at Jantihar village in the upazila started after slaughtering of 2 diseased cows on [27 May 2017], said locals. People engaged with the meat processing were infected with anthrax, said Livestock Officer Md Kamruzzaman. They have already collected samples of meat of the diseased animals for tests, he said. The symptoms of the disease show that the villagers slaughtered anthrax-infected animals for the sake of profit,\" said Kamruzzaman. Pabna Civil Surgeon Dr Tahazzal Hossain claimed that of the anthrax-infected patients, 10 are stated to be critical. They are now undergoing treatment at the upazila health complex. A 4-member medical team of Epidemiology, Disease Control and Research (IEDCR) in Dhaka has already visited Jontihar village for collecting samples of blood of the affected patients. -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail [As expected the local situation was worse than previously described and possibly will have more human moralities. - Mod.MHJ A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  .] [", "MERS-COV (33): SAUDI ARABIA (RIYADH), NOSOCOMIAL TRANSMISSION ************************************************************* A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Mon 5 Jun 2017 Source: Saudi MOH 5 Jun 2017 [edited] As of 14:00 [2:00 PM] today [Mon 5 Jun 2017], there have been a total of: 1629 laboratory-confirmed cases of MERS-CoV infection, including 668 deaths [reported case fatality rate 41.1 per cent], 942 recoveries, and 19 currently active cases/infections. [As previously mentioned, the numbers of deaths, recoveries and currently active cases come from my spreadsheet tallies and differ from those listed on the Saudi MOH website; my spreadsheet counts asymptomatic infections. - Mod.MPP] Since the last ProMED-mail update yesterday [4 Jun 2017], there have been a total of: 4 newly confirmed cases/infections 1 newly reported fatalities, and 0 newly reported recoveries. Information on newly confirmed cases (4 cases/infections) 1 - A 66 year old Saudi male, non-healthcare worker from Riyadh [Riyadh region] currently listed in stable condition, having been identified as an asymptomatic contact of a confirmed MERS-CoV infected individual. Classified as a secondary case in a household contact. 2 - A 29 year old expat male, non-healthcare worker from Riyadh [Riyadh region] currently listed in stable condition, having been identified as an asymptomatic contact of a confirmed MERS-CoV infected individual. Classified as a secondary healthcare acquired case in a patient. 3 - A 32 year old expat female, healthcare worker from Riyadh [Riyadh region] currently listed in stable condition. Classified as a secondary healthcare acquired case in a healthcare worker. 4- A 27 year old expat male, non-healthcare worker from Riyadh [Riyadh region] currently listed in stable condition. Dlassified as a secondary hospital acquired case in a patient. Information on newly confirmed fatality (1 fatality)  - A 65 year old Saudi male, non-healthcare worker from Riyadh [Riyadh region] with a history of pre-existing co-morbidities. [reported as a newly confirmed case on 19 May 2017 when he was noted to be in stable condition. Classified as a primary case with high risk exposures - Mod.MPP] -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail [Nosocomial transmission is continuing in Riyadh. Since the middle of May 2017, there have been a total of 14 cases of MERS-CoV infection associated with healthcare acquired transmission in Riyadh. In addition to these 14 cases/infections (9 of whom were asymptomatic contacts), there are an additional 3 cases during this period with high risk expsure histories still under investigation who may well be associated with this nosocomial transmission cycle. The HealthMap/ProMED map of Saudi Arabia can be found at:  . - Mod.MPP] [", "UNDIAGNOSED ILLNESS - PAKISTAN: (KHYBER PAKHTUNKHWA) CRIMEAN-CONGO HEMORRHAGIC FEVER SUSPECTED, REQUEST FOR INFORMATION *********************************************************************************************************************** A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Mon 5 Jun 2017 Source: The Express Tribune [edited] Four days after a suspected outbreak claimed five lives in Karak, authorities are still clueless as to what exactly the disease is. Health experts in the region are divided over what the disease is. Some suspect it to be an outbreak of Acute Watery Diarrhea (AWD) while others, after visiting the affected areas, believe that it is a strain of the Crimean-Congo hemorrhagic fever (CCHF). Cases of the still mysterious disease were 1st reported on [30 May 2017]. But doctors sat up and took notice when on [4 Jun 2017], 2 cases were reported from Lakki Marwat district. Different teams of medical experts from the area and the health department in Peshawar were dispatched to Karak and Lakki Marwat to probe the issue. \"Earlier, it looked like AWD but with the symptoms, we can say these are CCHF cases,\" a senior health official said, adding that they have \"sent samples to the National Institute of Health (NIH) and the results are awaited.\" In late May 2017, 6 people had slaughtered a cow in Bubbal Khail village and distributed the meat among 180 people. Those who were involved in the slaughter or skinning the cow were reportedly infected. A total of 4 died on the spot while a 5th died while receiving treatment at the Lady Reading Hospital (LRH). The 6th man, who was also shifted to LRH in critical condition, is still receiving treatment at the facility's Intensive Care Unit (ICU). Officials stated that initially, it looked like the men suffered from an outbreak of diarrhoea or gastroenteritis which had later converted into a viral haemorrhagic fever since 4 of 6 patients, who lived close together, died while exhibiting similar symptoms. A team of doctors who visited Bubbal Khail village were told by locals that the cases were probably related to the slaughtered cow, now believed to have been ill when it was slaughtered. The doctors discovered that those who were involved in the cow's slaughter, skinning it, butchering the meat and eating the meat got sick. But those who did not were healthy. \"Based on this observation, it was decided that these cases should provisionally be labeled and handled as cases of CCHF,\" a senior health official said. However, he added that a laboratory test of the samples would help them build a case. The medical experts suggested that the man currently admitted in LRH should be treated with Ribavirin, while locals in and around Karak should be sensitised about CCHF in coordination with district authorities and the Livestock Department. They also suggested that physicians should visit the affected village, check locals and provide the required medicines. [Byline: Umer Farooq] -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail [The above report pertains to a number of cases associated with slaughter and handling of a 'sick' animal. However even though the cases are currently considered as suspected CCHF, no clinical symptoms have been mentioned, and laboratory results are currently awaited. Any further updates on the epidemiology and laboratory confirmation of the cases would be highly appreciated. - Mod.UBA A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  .] [", "UNDIAGNOSED DISEASE, MULTIPLE CROPS - ECUADOR: (MANAB\u00cd) ******************************************************** A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Mon 29 May 2017 Source: FreshPlaza, El Diario report [in Spanish, trans. Corr.SB, summ. Mod.DHA, edited] A farmer [in a parish in Manab\u00ed province] reports that 40 per cent of his melons were damaged by a disease that appeared recently. It affects 3 out of 4 fruits on a plant, causing spots followed by rot. The Ministry of Agriculture said they are aware of the disease. It was noticed a few years ago and is thought to be connected with climate change and the crop cultivars planted. In 2017, it is more severe than before and is expected to affect yield and quality of short-lived crops like melon, watermelon, and papaya. The higher incidence is attributed to high humidity and increased insect activity. Farmers are also blamed for incorrect use of agrochemicals. and not practicing crop rotation. -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail [A number of diseases have been reported on both melons and papaya in the region. While there are some fungal and bacterial pathogens that have a wide host range, more than one crop disease may be affecting the area. An increased insect activity, as mentioned above, is known to favour the spread of multiple plant pathogens, either as specific vectors or unspecifically through mechanical injuries inflicted on the plants. Separate and reliable diagnosis of any pathogens affecting the different hosts will be essential for disease management. Maps Ecuador:  and Ecuador provinces: South America, overview: Pictures Photos of some papaya diseases via: Symptoms of some watermelon diseases via: Links List of major diseases and pathogens of cucurbits, including melons: List of major diseases and pathogens of papaya: - Mod.DHA] [", "SHIGELLOSIS - VIET NAM: (LAI CHAU) ********************************** A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Thu 25 May 2017 17:00 ICT Source: Viet Nam News [edited] One person has died and 60 people have reportedly been hospitalised in the dysentery outbreak in the northern mountainous province of Lai Chau. Although the outbreak has been under control, the risk of a reoccurrence is high, the provincial Preventive Health Centre said. Report from the health clinic in Phong Tho District's Ma Ly Chai Commune showed that the 1st cases of dysentery were reported in late February [2017] with typical symptoms such as fever, stomach pain, and diarrhea. In late April [2017], 27 cases were found, causing an outbreak in the commune. The health centre in Phong Tho District also reported 11 patients suffering from dysentery. The illness claimed the life of a 72 year old woman. All the patients tested positive for _Shigella flexneri_ -- a bacterium that causes dysentery. The reason for the outbreak was unhygienic habits of patients. The hot weather along with high humidity also contributed to the development of the bacteria. A preventive health team has been mobilised for supervision in Ma Ly Chai Commune. Those who are suspected of having the disease must be strictly observed. Chloramine B for sterilisation has been sent to the commune to prevent the spread of the disease. Dr Tran Th\u1ecb Lien, director of the Preventive Health Centre, said that they have asked the district's authority to support residents' water tanks and soaps and chloramine B. The centre has antibacterial medicines to treat those at high risk. There are 4 villages in Ma Ly Chai Commune with 99 percent of H\u00e0 Nh\u00ec ethnic minorities. Only 7 percent of them have hygienic toilets. -- Communicated by: ProMED-MBDS [Maps of Viet Nam can be seen at  and  . - Sr.Tech.Ed.MJ _Shigella_ was discovered over 100 years ago by the Japanese microbiologist, Kiyoshi Shiga, for whom the genus is named. There are 4 species: _S. boydii_, _S. dysenteriae_, _S. flexneri_, and _S. sonnei_. _Shigella_ organisms can survive transit through the stomach since they are less susceptible to acid than other bacteria; for this reason, as few as 10 to 100 organisms can cause disease. Ingested bacteria pass into the small intestine where they multiply; large numbers of bacteria then pass into the colon, where they enter the colonic cells. Given its relatively low infectious dose, transmission can occur via contaminated food and water or via direct person-to-person spread, including sexual practices more common in MSM (men who have sex with men). Humans are the only natural reservoir for the disease. Dysentery (formerly known as flux or the bloody flux) is an inflammatory disorder of the colon, which results in severe diarrhea containing mucus and/or blood in the feces with fever, abdominal pain, and rectal tenesmus (pain while passing the diarrhea). - Mod.LL] [", "VIBRIO VULNIFICUS - USA (03): (TEXAS) FATAL, TATTOO SITE ENTRY ************************************************************** A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Sun 4 Jun 2017 05:54 AM Source: ABC13, KTRK [edited] An unidentified Texas man died after he went swimming in the Gulf of Mexico shortly after he got a crucifix tattoo with the words \"Jesus is my life\" below it, according to a case study published last week [27 May 2017] . According to the medical journal, BMJ Case Reports, the unidentified 31-year-old man was in the Gulf of Mexico 5 days after the procedure. That's where he was infected by the bacterium, _Vibrio vulnificus_, which led to his hospitalization. What was especially shocking to the researchers was how quickly the man's condition deteriorated: He went swimming 5 days after he was tattooed, and 24 hours after he was admitted to the hospital, he was on life support. The case report notes that the 31-year-old suffered from chronic liver disease. He developed septic shock and died about 2 months later. While most healthy people do not die as a result of _V. vulnificus_, the authors of the study did say the case report showed how dangerous infection can be for those with liver illnesses, as well as anyone who receives a tattoo. One of the top rules after getting a new tattoo is to avoid swimming and bathing, because it's easy to pick up infections. Even if you don't have chronic liver disease, doctors say it's important to follow safety recommendations after getting new ink. -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail Rapporteur Kunihiko Iizuka [An unusual portal of entry for the bacterium is reported here. There are 2 other points to be emphasized: that vibrios are normal flora in warm saltwater (not indicative of any sewage contamination), and that most of the life-threatening illnesses occur in individuals with underlying medical illnesses, including immunocompromised states, chronic liver disease, and diabetes. So-called normal individuals often just get gastroenteritis. The range of disease due to _V. vulnificus_ can include more northern geographical areas if the area is affected by a substantial heat wave. It is likely that this is not a 2017 case since the _V. vulnificus_ season is just starting and the lead time for publication strongly suggests the case is from a past year. ProMED thanks this rapporteur for the posting who also supplied the citation itself below. Hendren N, Sukumar S, Glazer CS: _Vibrio vulnificus_ septic shock due to a contaminated tattoo. BMJ Case Reports 2017; doi:10.1136/bcr-2017-220199 \"We present a case of _Vibrio vulnificus_ septic shock and cellulitis in a patient with chronic liver disease that occurred after obtaining a leg tattoo with subsequent seawater exposure in the Gulf of Mexico. Initial suspicion for _V. vulnificus_ was high and he was started on empiric doxycycline and ceftriaxone at admission. Blood and wound cultures grew oxidase positive and comma-shaped Gram-negative rods ultimately confirmed to be _V. vulnificus_. Despite aggressive initial treatment, the patient developed septic shock and died. This case highlights the association of chronic liver disease and high mortality associated with infections of _V. vulnificus_. Health providers should remain vigilant for _V. vulnificus_ infections in patients with chronic liver disease and raw oyster ingestion or seawater exposure.\" - Mod.LL] [", "HEPATITIS A - USA (07): (CALIFORNIA) FATAL ****************************************** A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases [1] Date: Wed 31 May 2017 Source: San Diego County Health & Human Services Agency [edited] Since early 2017, the Public Health Services Division, in the County of San Diego Health and Human Services Agency, has been investigating a local hepatitis A outbreak. The outbreak investigation is ongoing. It has been challenging because of the long incubation period of the disease (15 to 50 days) and the difficulty experienced to contact many individuals sickened with the illness who are homeless and/or illicit drug users. To date, no common source of food, beverage, or other cause has been identified; as a result, the source of the outbreak remains undetermined. Vaccination efforts are being implemented in targeted locations by County staff and in collaboration with health care partners. Health providers are asked to inform the Epidemiology Program if they have a patient suspected to have the hepatitis A infection, before the patient leaves the emergency department or provider's office. San Diego county hepatitis A outbreak cases and deaths as of 30 May 2017 Cases / Deaths / Hospitalizations ------------------------------------- 133 / 3 / 106 (80 percent) Please note: Table does not include all reported hepatitis A cases in the county; only those that are local-outbreak-related. Also, data are provisional and subject to change. -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail Rapporteur Mary Marshall ****** [2] Date: Wed 31 May 2017 Source: CAHAN [California Health Alert Network] San Diego, Public Health Services, Epidemiology and Immunizations Services Branch [edited] Update no. 3: hepatitis A virus outbreak in San Diego County ------------------------------------------------------------ This health advisory updates local healthcare providers about recent hepatitis A virus (HAV) infections disproportionately affecting homeless and illicit drug-using individuals in San Diego County. Updated recommendations and resources on HAV are provided. Situation --------- As of 30 May 2017, 133 confirmed or probable HAV cases have been reported in an ongoing local outbreak in San Diego County. The cases had symptom onsets between 24 Nov 2016 and 26 May 2017. 106 (80 percent) of the cases have been hospitalized and 3 patients (2 percent) have died. The cases range in age from 21 to 82 years (median = 42 years), and 85 (64 percent) are male, with one (1 percent) self-identifying as a man who has sex with men. 84 (63 percent) of the cases are homeless, and 85 (64 percent) reported injection or non-injection illicit drug use; some cases have both risk factors. Of the cases with test results available for review, 28 of 106 (26 percent) have evidence of hepatitis C infection, and 7 of 107 (7 percent) have hepatitis B infection. The CDC has confirmed HAV RNA in serum samples of 86 outbreak cases. Viral sequencing indicates that 2 unique, closely related strains of HAV genotype 1B are involved. These strains are different than those associated with the ongoing HAV outbreak in southeastern Michigan and the outbreaks linked to frozen strawberries in 2016 and pomegranate seeds in 2013. There are several clusters of epidemiologically associated cases, although no specific common food, beverage, or drug sources have yet been identified. 27 cases reported receiving client services from a single homeless provider in downtown San Diego. 4 cases (3 clients, 1 volunteer) are associated with a homeless services provider in El Cajon. 6 cases are residents of a board and care facility in El Cajon. 6 cases are individuals who became symptomatic while incarcerated in a jail facility, but they were most likely exposed to the virus while homeless in the community. 2 secondary cases in jails have occurred, though each declined post-exposure prophylaxis during their exposure periods. Although most cases have been from the El Cajon/La Mesa area and downtown San Diego, cases have also been confirmed in individuals who were only in North County during their exposure periods. Recent HAV cases include a healthcare worker at a facility where many HAV cases were treated, and an employee of an agency that provides services to the homeless. These individuals have no identified risk factors for HAV other than their employment. The likelihood that these cases are occupationally related is a strong reminder of the importance of standard precautions in healthcare and the need to vaccinate individuals who work closely with the at-risk populations. Investigations of the confirmed and probable cases, as well as 2 dozen suspect cases, are ongoing. -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail [The number of cases of diagnosed hepatitis A in San Diego County in southern California continues to increase, now over a 6 month period. Date / Cases / Hospitalized (percentage) / Deaths (percentage) -------------------------------------------------------------- 5 Apr 2017 / 39 / 33 (85) / 1 (3) 4 May 2017 / 80 / 66 (83) / 3 (4) 31 May 2017 / 133 / 103 (80) / 3 (2) There have been 53 more cases over about 4 weeks and 94 more cases over 8 weeks. Since many cases of HAV infection are asymptomatic or anicteric (without jaundice), the total number of cases is likely to been significantly higher. It is not clear if the persistent increase is related to slow reporting, increased awareness and testing, secondary cases, or the persistent source or sources in the environment. An epidemiologic curve showing dates of onset over time would be useful in sorting out the possibilities. The very high hospitalization rate may be related to the homelessness of the cohort but could represent a more virulent strain. HAV infection occurred in some individuals chronically infected with either hepatitis B or C, but it is not clear if the fatalities occurred in those individuals. Homelessness and illicit substance use seem to be relevant risk factors while homosexual practices is not. It remains unclear how and from what vehicle the virus is spreading. - Mod.LL The state of California can be located on the HealthMap/ProMED-mail interactive map at . San Diego County can be seen on the map at  . - Sr.Tech.Ed.MJ] [", "AVIAN INFLUENZA (112): FRANCE (CENTRE-VAL DE LOIRE) POULTRY, LPAI H7, OIE ************************************************************************* A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Fri 2 Jun 2017 Source: OIE, WAHID (World Animal Health Information Database), weekly disease information 2017; 30(23) [edited] Low pathogenic avian influenza (poultry), France ------------------------------------------------ Information received on [and dated] 2 Jun 2017 from Dr Loic Evain, [Deputy Director General, CVO, General Directorate of Food, Ministry of Agriculture, Agrifood, and Forestry], Paris, France Summary Report type: immediate notification Date of start of the event: 17 May 2017 Date of confirmation of the event: 23 May 2017 Reason for notification: new strain of a listed disease in the country Causal agent: Low pathogenic avian influenza [LPAI] virus Serotype: H7 Nature of diagnosis: laboratory (advanced) This event pertains to a defined zone within the country New outbreaks (1) Summary of outbreaks Total outbreaks: 1 Outbreak 1 (31): Saulnay, Indre [Centre-Val de Loire] Date of start of the outbreak: 17 May 2017 Outbreak status: resolved 1 Jun 2017 Epidemiological unit: farm Total animals affected: Species / Susceptible / Cases / Deaths / Killed and disposed of / Slaughtered Birds / 4980 / - / 0 / 4980 / 0 Affected population: samples taken within the framework of the surveillance in a farm with mallard ducks and pheasants showed the presence of low pathogenic H7 virus, N unidentified. All animals were killed. Epidemiology Source of the outbreak(s) or origin of infection: unknown or inconclusive Epidemiological comments: a regulated zone was implemented within a one-kilometer radius of the outbreak. Control measures Measures applied: screening, traceability, stamping out, zoning, disinfection, vaccination prohibited, no treatment of affected animals Measures to be applied: no other measures Diagnostic test results Laboratory name and type: ANSES National Reference Laboratory (national laboratory) Species / Test / Test date / Result Birds / nucleotide sequencing / 23 May 2017 / Positive Birds / real-time reverse transcriptase/polymerase chain reaction (RRT-PCR) / 23 May 2017 / Positive Future reporting The event is continuing. Weekly follow-up reports will be submitted. [The location of the outbreak can be seen on the interactive map included in the OIE report at the source URL above.] -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail [Avian influenza viruses are divided by subtypes, based on 2 proteins found in the viruses: a hemagglutinin, or \"H\" protein, and a neuraminidase, or \"N\" protein. There are 16 H types and 9 N types yielding a total 144 possible combinations. The H5 and H7 subtypes are of particular concern, given the ability of these 2 H-types to mutate from low pathogenic to highly pathogenic strains. These 2 H-types have been known to cause serious disease and mortality in domestic poultry  . Low pathogenicity subtypes of avian influenza (H5N2, H5N3, H5N1, H5N9, and H5N8) have been circulating in France since November 2015. All outbreaks of LPAI reported from 1 Nov 2015 to date (6 Jun 2017) can be seen on the interactive map at (click on the section of interest on the map, and zoom in). Maps of France can be seen at  ,  , and  . - Mod.CRD] [", "FOODBORNE ILLNESS - PHILIPPINES (05): (METROPOLITAN MANILA) PRISONERS, FATAL, CULTURE RESULTS ********************************************************************************************* A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Mon 5 Jun 2017 Source: EpiCore Global Surveillance Project [edited] Preliminary results for 75 rectal swabs results were: - 11 positive for _Staphylococcus aureus_ - 1 for _Shigella flexneri_ 1A and 1 for _Aeromonas caviae_ Preliminary results of bacteriological testing for 24 water samples: - 6 positives for _Aeromonas hydrophila_ - 1 positive for _A. hydrophila_ and _A. caviae_ -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail [ProMED is thankful to the EpiCore Global Surveillance Project for this information. Classical staphylococcal gastrointestinal illness is enterotoxin-related, causing self-limited, non-febrile vomiting, with no or little diarrhea, which does not sound like the illness described in this quite large prison outbreak. Pseudomembranous enterocolitis is quite rarely caused by _S. aureus_ (Staph. aureus, (MRSA) - Canada: (QC) enterocolitis, antibiotic associated http://promedmail.org/post/20170505.5016134) but is not likely to be the cause here. Finding one rectal swab with _Shigella flexneri_ is certainly of note but cannot, in itself, imply that shigellosis is the cause of the entire outbreak. Likewise, although _Aeromonas_ was found in a clinical specimen mixed with _Shigella_ and in 7 of 24 water samples and _Aeromonas_ can cause diarrhea (von Graevenitz A: The role of _Aeromonas_ in diarrhea: a review. Infection. 2007; 35(2): 59-64), it is still too early to attribute this large outbreak to this organism. It is possible, certainly, that the outbreak is due to multiple enteric pathogens including viruses, bacteria, and protozoa. - Mod.LL A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  .] [", "UNDIAGNOSED ILLNESS - PAKISTAN (02): (KHYBER PAKHTUNKHWA), CCHF CONFIRMED ************************************************************************* A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: TuE 6 Jun 2017 Source: EpiCore Surveillance Project [edited] A total of 4 persons named RJ, N, AH, and AR have died while a relative of N is hospitalized and found positive for CCHF. -- Communicated by: EpiCore Surveillance Project member Sher Bahadar Assistant Professor The University of Agriculture Peshawar Khyber Pakhtunkhwa [ProMED thanks Assistant Prof. Bahadar from the EpiCore network for the information confirming the diagnosis of CCHF as follow-up to our posting on suspected CCHF cases in Khyber Pakhtunkhwa. Availability of early and rapid diagnostic tools is vital to control of zoonoses such as CCHF. - Mod.UBA A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  .] [", "KYASANUR FOREST DISEASE - INDIA (11): (MAHARASHTRA) UPDATE ********************************************************** A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Mon 5 Jun 2017, 11.19 PM IST Source: The Times of India (TOI), Times News Network (TNN) [edited] As many as 200 people have been found to be infected with monkey fever (Kyasanur forest disease) in 4 talukas [sub districts] of Sindhudurg district [Maharashtra] since October 2016. So far, 12 deaths have been confirmed. However, some sources from the medical field claim that over 20 deaths have taken place and 321 people have been infected with monkey fever. The fever has been reported at Dodamarg, Sawantwadi, Kudal and Kanakvali talukas. The fever was 1st reported in 2016. The district had sought help from doctors in Simoga and Manipal in Karnataka to tackle the problem. Sindhudurg district malaria officer Ashwini Jangam said, \"Samples taken from persons who have succumbed after getting infected with the fever have been sent to the National Institute of Virology in Pune to confirm the virus. The transmission of this disease is rampant through tick worm found on monkeys. We have started dusting malaphion 50m on both sides of the forest roads. Domestic animals are also being checked.\" The team of Manipal doctors has set up a lab that can help in detecting the virus. The officials are also conducting programmes to make people aware of the virus. \"Around 200 locals were reported to be suffering from monkey fever. Out of these, 12 persons have died of the disease. A team of Manipal doctors are collecting sample of the virus,\" Jangam said. A resident from Sindhudurg Sagar Chavan, who has been organizing awareness drives on this issue, said, \"We have got figures of at least 20 persons who have died due to monkey fever. As many as 321 have been infected. Many monkeys were also found dead which lead to the spread of the virus. Monkey habitats like cashew and coconut gardens are a major threat to the spread of the fever.\" Another local from Banda Mangal Kamat said, \"The Manipal team has collected samples from various areas in Banda. A total of 9 deaths were reported in Satmatwadi and 2 more from nearby areas.\" \"Around 200 locals were reported to be suffering from monkey fever. Out of these, 12 persons have died of the disease. Initially, a team of doctors from Simoga, Karnataka had guided us given their 40 years of experience. A team of Manipal doctors are collecting sample of the virus.\" [Byline: Umesh K Parida] -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail [Sindhudurg is an administrative district in the state of Maharashtra in India, which was carved out of the erstwhile Ratnagiri District KFD typically occurs during the dry season from November through May, which correlates with increased activity of the nymphs of ticks. Exposure to adult ticks and nymphs in rural or outdoor settings increases the risk of infection; herders, forest workers, farmers, and hunters are particularly at increased risk of contracting the disease. As mentioned in the above report, 12 deaths and 200 cases of Kyasanur forest Disease have been reported in Sindhudurg district of Maharashtra since October 2016. There is a need to create awareness among the general public on protection from tick bites and improving the availability of KFD vaccination facilities in the affected areas. The National Institute of Virology, Pune, has developed an inactivated chick embryo tissue culture vaccine against KFD  . - Mod.UBA A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  .] [", "AVIAN INFLUENZA, HUMAN (56): CHINA, H7N9 **************************************** A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases In this update: [1] Guangxi [2] Shandong [3] Chongqing [4] Sichuan [5] Epidemiology of avian influenza A H7N9 virus in human beings across 5 epidemics in mainland China, 2013-17 [6] Sandwich Eliza Assay ****** [1] Guangxi Date: 5 Jun 2017 Source: FIC (Flu Information Centre/Flu in China) [edited] During the period between 26 May to 1 Jun 2017, the Guangxi Zhuang Autonomous Region reported one human H7N9 AIV fatal case (49-year-old male) in Baise city. The Guangxi Zhuang Autonomous Region has reported total of 26 human H7N9 AIV cases (including 13 fatal, 13 discharged from hospital) since 2017. -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail [The HealthMap/ProMED map of Guangxi Autonomous Region, China can be found at: . - Mod.MPP] ****** [2] Shandong Date: 5 Jun 2017 Source: FIC (Flu Information Centre/Flu in China) [edited] According to the HFPC of Zibo city, a human H7N9 AIV case (55-year-old male) was reported in Yiyuan county of Zibo city of Shandong province on 27 May 2017. -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail [The HealthMap/ProMED map of Shandong Province, China can be found at:  - Mod.MPP] ****** [3] Chongqing Date: 5 Jun 2017 Source: FIC (Flu Information Centre/Flu in China) [edited] According to the HFPC of Chongqing, Kaizhou district reported one human H7N9 AIV case after the reconfirmation from Chongqing CDC on 4 Jun 2017. The 37-year-old female, resident of Kaizhou district, remained in hospital for treatment. So far, Chongqing has reported 8 human H7N9 AIV cases. -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail [The HealthMap/ProMED map of Sichuan Province, China can be found at:  - Mod.MPP] ****** [4] Sichuan Date: 6 Jun 2017 Source: FIC (Flu Information Centre/Flu in China) [edited] According to the government of Renshou county, Zhangjia town of Renshou county of Meishan city reported one human H7N9 AIV case on 25 May 2017. This is the 1st human H7N9 AIV case reported in Meishan city. The 67-year-old male, resident of Zhangjia town of Renshou county, was in serious condition and remained in Renshou county people's hospital for treatment and quarantine. -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail [The HealthMap/ProMED map ofChongqing, China can be found at:  . - Mod.MPP] ****** [5] Epidemiology of avian influenza A H7N9 virus in human beings across 5 epidemics in mainland China, 2013-17 Date: 6 Jun 2017 Source: FIC (Flu Information Centre/Flu in China) [edited] Summary ------ Background The avian influenza A H7N9 virus has caused infections in human beings in China since 2013. A large epidemic in 2016-17 prompted concerns that the epidemiology of the virus might have changed, increasing the threat of a pandemic. We aimed to describe the epidemiological characteristics, clinical severity, and time-to-event distributions of patients infected with A H7N9 in the 2016-17 epidemic compared with previous epidemics. Methods In this epidemiological study, we obtained information about all laboratory-confirmed human cases of A H7N9 virus infection reported in mainland China as of 23 Feb 2017 from an integrated electronic database managed by the China Center for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) and provincial CDCs. Every identified human case of A H7N9 virus infection was required to be reported to China CDC within 24 h via a national surveillance system for notifiable infectious diseases. We described the epidemiological characteristics across epidemics, and estimated the risk of death, mechanical ventilation, and admission to the intensive care unit for patients admitted to hospital for routine clinical practice rather than for isolation purpose. We estimated the incubation periods, and time delays from illness onset to hospital admission, illness onset to initiation of antiviral treatment, and hospital admission to death or discharge using survival analysis techniques. Findings Between 19 Feb 2013, and 23 Feb 2017, 1220 laboratory-confirmed human infections with A H7N9 virus were reported in mainland China, with 134 cases reported in the spring of 2013, 306 in 2013-14, 219 in 2014-15, 114 in 2015-16, and 447 in 2016-17. The 2016-17 A H7N9 epidemic began earlier, spread to more districts and counties in affected provinces, and had more confirmed cases than previous epidemics. The proportion of cases in middle-aged adults increased steadily from 41 percent (55 of 134) to 57 percent (254 of 447) from the 1st epidemic to the 2016-17 epidemic. Proportions of cases in semi-urban and rural residents in the 2015-16 and 2016-17 epidemics (63 percent [72 of 114] and 61 percent [274 of 447], respectively) were higher than those in the 1st 3 epidemics (39 percent [52 of 134], 55 percent [169 of 306], and 56 percent [122 of 219], respectively). The clinical severity of individuals admitted to hospital in the 2016-17 epidemic was similar to that in the previous epidemics. Interpretation Age distribution and case sources have changed gradually across epidemics since 2013, while clinical severity has not changed substantially. Continued vigilance and sustained intensive control efforts are needed to minimise the risk of human infection with A H7N9 virus. -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail ****** [6] Sandwich Eliza Assay Date: 5 Jun 2017 Source: FIC (Flu Information Centre/Flu in China) [edited] Although exhibiting no or low virulence in poultry, avian influenza virus H7N9 has caused around 1200 confirmed human infections in China with a case-fatality rate of 30 percent since 2013. A highly pathogenic H7N9 virus (HP-H7), with the HA antigenicity distinct from the previous one, were recently detected in patients and poultry. Therefore, convenient rapid diagnosis with reliability will allow early antiviral use and management for H7N9 infection. Here, a sandwich ELISA targeting the conserved viral antigen, neuraminidase (NA) was developed. The immunoassay employed mouse monoclonal antibody (mAb) 3C1 to specifically capture the N9 and 3E9 for the detection. Its limit of detection is 6.25ng/ml for N9 protein of A/Anhui/1/2013(H7N9, AH1/2013) and 0.125HAU/50\u03bcl for live virus, AH1/2013 and A/Environment/Jiangxi/28/2009 (H11N9), respectively. When applied to test the 5 clinic throat swabs from H7N9 patients confirmed by nuclear acid testing (NAT) using quantitative reverse-transcriptase polymerase chain reaction (Q-PCR), 2 samples showed a positive result in sandwich ELISA, while all were negative using commercial Flu A and H7 subtype rapid antigen tests (RAT). The ELISA using anti-N9 mAbs provided a valuable approach to detect H7N9 virus and quantify the N9 protein. Ref. Yu Y, Zhang X, Zhao B, Sun Y, et al. A Sandwich ELISA for the Detection of Neuraminidase of Avian Influenza A(H7N9) Virus. J Virol Methods 24 May 2017. -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail [The ELIZA assay is not as specific as molecular tests such as real time PCR, but based on the data above, performed better than the available rapid tests. The assay requires further validation, as only 5 human samples were tested. - Mod.UBA A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  .] [", "MERS-COV (34): SAUDI ARABIA, UAE, QATAR, WHO ******************************************** A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases In this update: [1] Saudi Arabia, 3 new cases/infections - MOH 6 Jun 2017 [2] Saudi Arabia, UAE, Qatar - WHO update 6 Jun 2017 ****** [1] Saudi Arabia, 3 new cases/infections - MOH 6 Jun 2017 Date: 6 Jun 2017 Source: Saudi MOH [edited] As of 14:00 [2:00 PM] today [Tue 6 Jun 2017], there have been a total of: 1632 laboratory-confirmed cases of MERS-CoV infection, including 668 deaths [reported case fatality rate 40.9 per cent], 942 recoveries, and 19 currently active cases/infections. [As previously mentioned, the numbers of deaths, recoveries and currently active cases come from my spreadsheet tallies and differ from those listed on the Saudi MOH website; my spreadsheet counts asymptomatic infections. - Mod.MPP] Since the last ProMED-mail update yesterday [5 Jun 2017], there have been a total of: 3 newly confirmed cases/infections 0 newly reported fatalities, and 0 newly reported recoveries. Information on newly confirmed cases (3 cases/infections) 1 - A 45-year-old expat male, non-healthcare worker from Hufoof [Ash Sharq\u012byah region] currently in stable condition. Classified as a primary case with a history of direct contact with camels in the 14 days preceding onset of illness. 2 - An 84-year-old Saudi male, non-healthcare worker from Riyadh [Riyadh region] currently in stable condition, having been identified as an asymptomatic contact of a confirmed MERS-CoV infected individual. Classified as a secondary hospital acquired case in a patient. 3 - A 48-year-old Saudi male, healthcare worker from Riyadh [Riyadh region] currently listed in stable condition, having been identified as an asymptomatic contact of a confirmed MERS-CoV infected individual. Classified as a secondary healthcare acquired case in a healthcare worker. -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail [A map showing the locations of these cases can be seen at the source URL. - Mod.MPP] ****** [2] Saudi Arabia, UAE, Qatar - WHO update 6 Jun 2017 Date: 6 Jun 2017 Source: WHO Emergencies preparedness, response [edited] Between 21 Apr and 29 May 2017, the National IHR Focal Point of Saudi Arabia reported 25 additional cases of Middle East Respiratory Syndrome Coronavirus (MERS-CoV) infection including 6 fatal cases. On 16 May 2017, the IHR NFP of the United Arab Emirates reported 2 additional cases of MERS-CoV. On 23 May 2017, the National IHR Focal Point of Qatar reported one additional case of MERS-CoV. Details of the cases MERS-CoV cases reported between 21 Apr and 29 May 2017 Case no. / Date report WHO / City of residence / Age / Sex / HCW / Co-morbidities / Camel exposure / Camel milk / Exposure to other cases / Date of onset of symptoms / Date of hospitalization / Date of lab confirmation / Status / Date of outcome Qatar 1 / 2017-05-23 / Doha / 29 / M / No / No / Yes / NA / NA / 2017-05-14 / 2017-05-22 / 2017-05-23 / Alive United Arab Emirates 1 / 2017-05-16 / Al Ain / 69 / M / No / Yes / Yes / NA / NA / 2017-05-03 / 2017-05-05 / 2017-05-11 / Alive 2 / 2017-05-16 / Al Ain / 45 / M / No / Yes / Yes / NA / Yes* / NA / NA / 2017-05-15 / Alive *Case was detected through contact tracing of a previous MERS-CoV case. Saudi Arabia 1 / 2017-05-29 / Madinah / 60 / M / No / Yes / NA / NA / NA / 2017-05-26 / 2017-05-28 / 2017-05-29 / Alive 2 / 2017-05-25 / Jeddah / 52 / M / No / Yes / Yes / Yes / NA / 2017-05-15 / 2017-05-23 / 2017-05-24 / Alive 3 / 2017-05-21 / Hail / 64 / M / No / Yes / NA / NA / NA / 2017-05-14 / 2017-05-19 / 2017-05-20 / Alive 4 / 2017-05-19 / Almithnab / 43 / M / No / Yes / Yes / Yes / NA / 2017-05-13 / 2017-05-16 / 2017-05-18 / Alive 5 / 2017-05-19 / Riyadh / 63 / M / No / Yes / NA / NA / NA / 2017-05-12 / 2017-05-17 / 2017-05-18 / Alive 6 / 2017-05-17 / Riyadh / 38 / M / No / NA / NA / NA / Yes* / 2017-05-14 / 2017-05-24** / 2017-05-15 / Alive 7 / 2017-05-17 / Bishah / 57 / M / Yes / NA / NA / NA / Yes* / NA / NA / 2017-05-16 / Alive 8 / 2017-05-16 / Riyadh / 25 / F / Yes / NA / NA / NA / Yes* / NA / NA / 2017-05-15 / Alive 9 / 2017-05-15 / Riyadh / 30 / F / Yes / NA / NA / NA / Yes* / NA / NA / 2017-05-14 / Alive 10 / 2017-05-15 / Riyadh / 33 / M / Yes / NA / NA / NA / Yes* / NA / NA / 2017-05-14 / Alive 11 / 2017-05-14 / Riyadh / 55 / M / No / Yes / NA / NA / NA / 2017-05-08 / 2017-05-11 / 2017-05-13 / Deceased / 2017-05-24 12 / 2017-05-13 / Bisha / 54 / M / No / Yes / NA / NA / Yes* / 2017-05-01 / 2017-05-01** / 2017-05-10 / Deceased / 2017-05-16 13 / 2017-05-09 / Bisha / 71 / M / No / Yes / NA / NA / NA / 2017-05-03 / 2017-05-06 / 2017-05-08 / Deceased / 2017-05-24 14 / 2017-05-08 / Hofouf / 40 / F / No / No / NA / NA / NA / 2017-05-02 / 2017-05-07 / 2017-05-08 / Alive 15 / 2017-05-08 / Alnemas / 75 / M / No / Yes / NA / NA / NA / 2017-05-02 / 2017-05-05 / 2017-05-07 / Deceased / 2017-05-08 16 / 2017-05-06 / Riyadh / 46 / M / No / No / NA / NA / NA / 2017-04-24 / 2017-05-05 / 2017-05-06 / Deceased / [2017-05-14] 17 / 2017-05-03 / Albukiriah / 74 / M / No / Yes / Yes / Yes / NA / 2017-04-24 / 2017-04-30 / 2017-05-02 / Alive 18 / 2017-04-29 / Buridah / 68 / M / No / Yes / Yes / Yes / NA / 2017-04-25 / 2017-04-28 / 2017-04-29 / Alive 19 / 2017-04-28 / Mahayl Assir / 61 / M / No / Yes / Yes / Yes / NA / 2017-04-20 / 2017-04-26 / 2017-04-28 / Alive 20 / 2017-04-28 / Hofouf / 81 / M / No / Yes / NA / NA / NA / 2017-04-20 / 2017-04-26 / 2017-04-28 / Deceased / 2017-05-04 21 / 2017-04-28 / Alhaisu / 65 / M / No / Yes / Yes / Yes / NA / 2017-04-25 / 2017-04-26 / 2017-04-28 / Alive 22 / 2017-04-26 / Wadi Aldwaser / 26 / M / No / NA / NA / NA / Yes* / NA / NA / 2017-03-26 / Alive 23 / 2017-04-21 / Wadi Aldwaser / 31 / M / No / NA / NA / NA / Yes* / NA / NA / 2017-03-21 / Alive 24 / 2017-04-21 / Wadi Aldwaser / 58 / M / No / NA / NA / NA / Yes* / NA / NA / 2017-03-21 / Alive 25 / 2017-04-21 / Wadi Aldwaser / 50 / M / No / NA / NA / NA / Yes* / NA / NA / 2017-03-21 / Alive *Case was detected through contact tracing of a previous MERS-CoV case. **Hospitalized for other unrelated condition prior to symptom onset. Saudi Arabia Between [21 Apr 2017] and 29 May 2017, 25 cases of MERS-CoV infection were reported in Saudi Arabia including 6 fatal cases. Twelve of the 25 reported cases during this period were associated with 3 simultaneous yet unrelated clusters of MERS cases. The Ministry of Health is evaluating each case and their contacts and implementing measures to limit further human-to-human transmission. A description of the 3 clusters is below. Cluster 1 A cluster of cases has been identified at a hospital in Bisha city, Assir Region. Cases associated with this cluster are: 1st identified fatal case: A 71-year-old male reported on 9 May 2017. Secondary case - Healthcare contact: A 54-year-old male reported to WHO on 13 May 2017. Secondary case - Healthcare contact: A 57-year-old male reported to WHO on 17 May 2017. Cluster 2 A cluster of cases has been identified in a hospital in Riyadh city, Riyadh Region. Cases associated with this cluster are: 1st identified fatal case: A 55-year-old male reported to WHO on 14 May 2017. Secondary case - Healthcare contact: A 33-year-old male reported to WHO on 15 May 2017. Secondary case - Healthcare contact: A 30-year-old female reported to WHO on 15 May 2017. Secondary case - Healthcare contact: A 25-year-old female reported to WHO on 16 May 2017. Secondary case - Healthcare contact: A 38-year-old male reported to WHO on 17 May 2017. Cluster 3 A 3rd cluster was detected at a hospital in Wadi Aldwaser city, Riyadh region. This outbreak is believed to be over based on the follow-up period of all contacts. The 4 newly identified cases associated with this outbreak are listed below. In total, 5 cases were associated with this outbreak: 1st identified case: A 55-year-old male previously reported to WHO on 19 Apr 2017 (see Disease Outbreak News published on 27 Apr 2017). Secondary case - Household contact: A 50-year-old male reported to WHO on 21 Apr 2017. Secondary case - Household contact: A 58-year-old male reported to WHO on 21 Apr 2017. Secondary case - Healthcare contact: A 31-year-old male reported to WHO on 21 Apr 2017. Secondary case - Household contact: A 26-year-old male reported to WHO on 26 Apr 2017. United Arab Emirates On 16 May 2017, 2 cases of MERS-CoV infection were reported in the United Arab Emirates. Both cases were reported from Al Ain city and both have reported direct links to dromedary camels. The 1st case that was identified, a 69-year-old male farmer, is in critical condition in hospital, and the 2nd case, a 45-year-old male butcher, is asymptomatic and identified during contact tracing of the 1st case. Contact tracing and dromedary investigations are ongoing. Qatar On 23 May 2017, one case of MERS-CoV infection was reported in Qatar. The case, a 29-year-old male from Doha, has reported frequent contact with dromedary camels. The Department of Health Protection and Communicable Disease Control in the Ministry of Public Health and animal health resources are currently carrying out case investigation and contact tracing. Globally, since September 2012, WHO has been notified of 1980 laboratory-confirmed cases of infection with MERS-CoV, including at least 699 related deaths reported. -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail Rapporteur Marianne Hopp [According to the above WHO update, as of 29 May 2017, there had been a total of 1980 laboratory confirmed cases of infection with the MERS-CoV reported to WHO, including 699 related deaths (reported case fatality rate of 35.3 percent). During the same period (2012 through 29 May 2017) there were a total of 1614 laboratory confirmed cases of MERS-CoV infection including 665 deaths reported by Saudi Arabia. Hence, Saudi Arabia represents 81.5 percent of the total number of cases of MERS-CoV infection and 95.1 percent of the total number of deaths attributable to MERS-CoV infection reported to WHO during this period. All of the cases reported in the above WHO report (including those from Saudi Arabia, Qatar, and the UAE), have been reported previously in ProMED-mail posts (see references below). Since 29 May 2017, there have been an additional 18 laboratory confirmed cases and 3 deaths reported by Saudi Arabia, with no additional cases reported by other countries during this same period. Additional information on the cases listed in the above WHO report include official outcome information from the Saudi MOH website with recoveries reported on cases 3, 7, 10 reported on 30 May 2017, case 4 on 29 May 2017, case 6 on 28 May 2019, case 8 on 24 May 2017, case 9 on 27 May 2017, case 14 on 15 May 2017, cases 17, 22 on 12 May 2017, case 18 on 11 May 2017. case 19 on 19 May 2017, case 21 on 2 May 2017, and case 24 on 9 May 2017. In addition, case 5 was reported on 5 Jun 2017 as having died. Additional official outcome information is still pending on cases 1, 2, 24, 25. While transmission of the MERS-CoV documented in Bisha and Wadi Aldawasir appear to have been interrupted, nosocomial transmission is still continuing in Riyadh as seen in section [1] above. With today's [6 Jun 2017] addition of 2 more nosocomial infections, the tally of cases/infections related to the nosocomial transmission in Riyadh is now up to 16 cases (11 of whom are identified as asymptomatic contacts), with an additional 3 cases identified in Riyadh still under investigation for possible high risk exposures. HealthMap/ProMED maps can be found at: Saudi Arabia: United Arab Emirates: Qatar: .  - Mod.MPP] [", "MEASLES UPDATE (31) ******************** A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases In this update: Europe [1] Italy [2] UK, Wales, Newport USA [3] Travelers: study [4] Minnesota Middle East [5] Syria (Daraa Governorate, Syria; Quneitra Governorate) [6] Israel ****** Europe ------ [1] Italy Date: Sat 20 May 2017 Source: Euronews [edited] Get your children vaccinated, or be fined. That's now the message in Italy, where the country's cabinet has approved a law which obliges parents to protect their children against a string of infectious diseases. Those up to 6 years old will not be accepted into nursery schools without proof of inoculations. And parents sending their children to school after that age without vaccinating them 1st will now face fines. \"This is not an emergency, but it is a matter of concern to which the government intends to respond to,\" said Paolo Gentiloni, Italian Prime Minister. \"I am convinced that, with the necessary gradual steps, Italian families will have a much higher level of protection for their children than is currently the case.\" It comes after a warning that a fall-off in vaccinations had led to a measles epidemic, an epidemic that's sparked a huge public debate. Some 2395 measles cases have been recorded so far this year [2017], compared with some 840 in all of 2016, and 250 in 2015. Vaccines against measles, mumps, rubella, chicken pox and meningitis, which were previously only recommended, will now become mandatory. The law will also oblige inoculation against polio, diphtheria, tetanus, hepatitis B, whooping cough and haemophilia B. -- Communicated by: Kathryn Soderholm and ProMED-ESP [A similar report in Spanish reviews the news and adds on the debate of the role the anti-vaccine groups have had on the new outbreaks. A map of Italy can be found at ] [In the late 1970s, vaccination coverages had dropped in the USA and the implementation of mandatory vaccination for school entry was how the USA was able to increase vaccination coverages. Unfortunately exceptions to this rule combined with the anti-vaccine movement has contributed to a resurgence of measles outbreaks in the USA as well as in European countries. - Mod.MPP] ****** [2] UK, Wales, Newport Date: Mon 5 Jun 2017, 4 PM Source: ITV [edited] A measles outbreak is being investigated in Newport as 4 people with links to a High School were confirmed to be infected. Parents of pupils at Lliswerry High School were contacted after 4 cases were confirmed. Children with measles symptoms have been told to stay home from school. Public Health Wales has since told parents to ensure their children have received both doses of the MMR Vaccine. Heather Lewis, Consultant in Health Protection for Public Health Wales, said: \"While 4 cases of measles may not sound a lot, we know that there are other children attending the school who are unvaccinated and could easily catch and spread measles. We urge parents whose children have not received 2 doses of MMR to ensure that they speak to their GP immediately to arrange this quick, safe and effective vaccine. \" Vaccination is recommended as the most effective way to protect against measles which can cause serious complications such as ear infections, pneumonia and meningitis, and death in rare cases. Vaccinations are taking place at Lliswerry High School this week as Public Health Wales continues to investigate the outbreak. -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts [A map of the United Kingdom can be found at  ] [The discussion in this article omits the occurrence of SSPE - subacute sclerosing panencephalitis, a delayed complication of measles infection, and a devastating one for both the individual who had been infected and their family. - Mod.MPP] ****** USA --- [3] Travelers: study Date: Sat 3 June 2017 Source: Study Finds [edited] More than half of U.S. adults recommended to receive vaccination against measles prior to traveling abroad didn't do so at health clinics, a new study finds. Researchers from Massachusetts General Hospital and Harvard Medical School found that 53 percent of eligible adults examined from 2009 to 2014 didn't receive the measles vaccine -- with about half refusing the recommended vaccination because they weren't worried. The new study of more than 40 800 patients born after 1956 and seen for pre-travel consultation at health clinics also found that 84 percent were determined to be immune to the disease after having gone through 2 MMR vaccinations in the past. Travelers eligible for the vaccine were least likely to receive immunization at clinics in the Southern U.S. or at nonacademic medical centers. \"Measles has been eliminated in the U.S. since 2000, which means that all measles cases in the country can be traced back to an imported case - either a foreign visitor or a U.S. resident returning from international travel,\" says lead author Dr. Emily Hyle, of the MGH Division of Infectious Diseases, in a hospital press release. Nearly one-quarter (24 percent) of providers referred travelers over to another healthcare provider for vaccination, while 28 percent of consultations saw providers deciding not even suggesting MMR vaccinations. \"It was surprising to see such a high number of missed opportunities for MMR vaccination, even at these specialized pre-travel consultations, but our results also suggest ways to improve the rate of MMR immunization among eligible travelers,\" says Hyle. For those without evidence of measles immunity, the Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices recommends 2 documented doses of the MMR vaccine for adult travelers. Positive tests showing antibodies to the virus as well as a documented previous case of measles are sufficient evidence, the experts say. Worldwide, it's estimated that more than 300 children die from measles complications each day. In the United States, 667 cases were reported to CDC in 2014--the largest number of cases in a year since 1994. These cases resulted from people infected overseas bringing the virus into the United States. \"Since more than 60 percent of the measles importations into the country are due to returning U.S. travelers, increasing the number of travelers who are immune to measles will reduce the number of measles cases,\" adds Hyle. \"We can definitely improve how often providers specializing in pre-travel medical advice offer MMR vaccine to eligible travelers and encourage clear discussions with patients about the risks of contracting measles and of spreading the disease after their return to the U.S.\" The researchers caution that even singular cases of measles can trigger a major outbreak, particularly in communities or areas where there is a high number of people that never received immunization or are not immune. Although the virus may just cause fever-like reactions and symptoms, it can lead to more serious health consequences and hospitalization among children. \"Measles is one of the most infectious diseases known - 90 percent of people who are not immune will contract measles from an even-minimal exposure to someone who is infected,\" says senior author Dr. Regina LaRocque, of Harvard Medical School. This study was published in Hyle EP et al. Missed Opportunities for Measles, Mumps, Rubella Vaccination Among Departing U.S. Adult Travelers Receiving Pretravel Health Consultations. Annals of Int Med 16 May 2017 DOI: 10.7326/M16-2249 [Byline: Benjamin Fearnow] -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts ****** [4] Minnesota Date: Mon 5 Jun 2017 Source: Independent Journal Review [edited] For 90 years measles ravaged through the United States with no preventable cure. However, thanks to a vaccine that was developed in 1968, measles was declared to be eliminated from America in 2002, as reported by the Center for Disease Control. Now, 17 years later, the disease is back with a vengeance and one state is taking a major hit. According to the Minnesota Department of Health, in 2017, there have been 75 cases of measles concentrated in only 4 counties of Minnesota: 66 in Hennepin County 3 in Ramsey County 4 in Crow Wing County 2 in Le Sueur County 72 of the victims are under 17 years old. This year, Minnesota has had more cases than the whole of the United States combined and the CDC is blaming it all to one thing ... vaccinations. As reported by the state's health department, 92 percent of the people who contracted the disease were confirmed to be unvaccinated. Kristen Ehresmann, director of the Infectious Disease Epidemiology, Prevention, and Control Division at the state's Department of Health, told CNN, \"Many of the cases could have been prevented if people had gotten vaccinated.\" She would prefer to invest funds in preventing measles than fighting it and explained that the disease can cause permanent damage to the brain and lungs. Ehresmann noted that there really is no plan b to the vaccine and said: \"There is no antiviral medicine against measles. All we can do is provide IV fluids, oxygen and support and hope they survive.\" She urged people to \"not listen to false messages from anti-vaccine groups,\" and reiterated that not vaccinating your child is \"to put your child at risk.\" Measles is highly contagious because to be exposed to the disease, all you have to do is breathe the same air as someone who already has it. The outbreak is believed to have started in a Somali community about a decade ago when members of the community felt Somali children were more prone to autism than white children. Fox News reported that anti-vaccine groups brought to the community the now-discredited research by British researcher Andrew Wakefield, that vaccines may be a cause of autism. Since then, Ehresmann noted that vaccine rates have plummeted within the Somali community, and the Minnesota health department reported, 84 percent of people who contracted measles were of Somali ethnicity. Although Ehresmann reiterated catching measles \"has nothing to do with being Somali,\" and everything to do with being unvaccinated. Challenges seem rife with this outbreak and the timing couldn't have been worse. Ramadan will conclude on [34 Jun 2017] with a large feast, which has the potential to be a prime breeding ground for spreading the virus. As part of a continual prevention program, Ehresmann reached out to the mosques and was reassured by imams that they will propagate the message that if you have measles, you should isolate yourself. [Byline: Jenni Fink] -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts [There has been tremendous harm done by the discredited study by A Wakefield falsely demonstrating a link between autism and measles. That this report should have so much more influence than accurate reports of validated scientific studies showing no evidence of a connection between the 2 is very unfortunate. Prior reports on the measles outbreak among the Somalis in Minnesota can be found in the ProMED archives. A map of Minnesota, United States can be found at  - Mod.LK] ****** Middle East ----------- [5] Syria (Daraa Governorate, Syria; Quneitra Governorate) Date: Mon 5 Jun 2017 Source: SyriaDirect [edited] A measles outbreak in opposition-held regions of southern Syria has infected nearly 150, mostly newborns and young children, because of a 2-year absence of vaccinations, 2 doctors who are treating the outbreak told Syria Direct. The doctors documented 60 measles infections in the rebel-held Daraa countryside and 70 cases in adjacent, opposition-controlled Quneitra province in the month of May [2017] alone, Dr. Yarub a-Zouabi, a pediatrician in the eastern Daraa countryside, told Syria Direct. \"We cannot give any firm statistics because every day more and more infected residents come to our health centers,\" Dr. Yasser al-Farouh, a pediatrician in the western Daraa countryside, told Syria Direct. Both a-Zouabi and Farouh are regional coordinators for the Early Warning Alert and Response Network (EWARN), a public health organization tracking epidemics in opposition-held areas of Syria. The 1st signs of the recent measles outbreak appeared in March [2017] in rebel-held Quneitra, a southwestern province bordering the Israeli-occupied Golan Heights. At the time, medical professionals in the opposition-controlled areas of Daraa had only documented a handful of suspected measles cases, said a-Zouabi. But since that time, measles symptoms spread to the eastern and western Daraa countryside due, at least in part, to overcrowding and internal displacement in rebel-held areas of the province. The main reason for the outbreak is that most infants and young children in opposition areas of the province are not vaccinated. Only 2 doses of the measles vaccine are necessary to properly immunize children against the viral disease: the 1st during infancy and the 2nd at 4 -- 6 years of age. Measles disproportionately affects young children, and often with a fever, rash and potentially lethal complications that can be prevented by immunization. Children who are already symptomatic cannot be given a vaccine, and antiviral treatment does not currently exist for measles. This means that doctors can only resort to palliative measures such as painkillers, antipyretics and IV fluids to ensure that the condition of patients does not worsen. \"The measles vaccine reduces occurrence of this potentially fatal viral infection by more than 99 percent, with children the primary victims of this wholly preventable disease,\" Dr. Homer Venters, an epidemiologist and Physicians for Human Rights' director of operations, told Syria Direct on [Mon 5 Jun 2017]. Since the outbreak of the Syrian war in 2011, Physicians for Human Rights (PHR) has documented the spread of disease, attacks on medical personnel and infrastructure and reports of chemical weapons use across the country. \"Death and disability from measles infection is a stark reminder that armed conflict harms health beyond the impact of bullets and bombs,\" the doctor added. The recent outbreak of measles \"boils down to the shortcomings of vaccination programs, which are still controlled by the Syrian regime's Ministry of Health,\" said pediatrician Farouh. Vaccines must be administered by a trained professional and require specific conditions for storage and distribution. In Syria, the Ministry of Health organizes vaccination campaigns with the assistance of the World Health Organization (WHO) and the Syrian Arab Red Crescent (SARC). But the government ministry retains control over areas and quantities of vaccine distribution, and SARC requires regime permission to enter any opposition-held areas. The Ministry of Health launched an anti-measles campaign on [21 May 2017] aimed at vaccinating \"children between 7 months and 5 years of age,\" state news agency SANA reported at the time. But the campaign was too late to stop the spread of the infection in the opposition-held south, and only a small quantity of vaccines entered the Daraa countryside, said a-Zouabi. The vaccination campaign did not provide any mobile teams and only set up distribution stations in a small number of health centers, the pediatrician added. \"Those who didn't hear [about the campaign] were once again deprived of their right to vaccines.\" The last time Daraa residents had access to the measles vaccine--prior to last month's campaign--was in May 2015, said both a-Zouabi and al-Farouh. Syria Direct contacted the Damascus branch of the World Health Organization for details about vaccine distribution in opposition-areas. The office did not comment. In his clinic in the eastern Daraa countryside, a-Zouabi distributes Vitamin A supplements to any patients displaying symptoms of measles. He sends serum samples to a laboratory established by the Early Warning Alert and Response Network (EWARN), the public health program a-Zouabi works with, last month [May 2017]. \"With each new case that comes to the health center, we are overcome with worry and fear that it will be confirmed as a measles infection,\" he says. For a 35-year-old male resident of the rebel-held east countryside, the physicians at his local hospital confirmed that his 2 daughters, who are not vaccinated, had contracted the viral infection last month [May 2017]. Physicians at a hospital in the eastern Daraa town of al-Hirak confirmed the presence of the disease with a blood test. They gave him vitamins and medicine for fever and diarrhea for his daughters--ages 2 and 8 months. \"I tried to isolate my daughters as well as I could, as the hospital staff instructed me,\" he told Syria Direct on [Mon 5 Jun 2017]. \"I live in 1 house with 3 other families\" the father said. \"I'm scared that this infection cannot be contained.\" -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts [The situation in Syria is tragic, and one can only hope the world will respond to the needs of the children to protect them against vaccine preventable diseases, which should be achievable. A map of Syria can be found at . - Mod.LK] ****** [6] Israel Date: Mon 5 Jun 2017, 9:38 AM Source: Israel National News [edited] In recent weeks, 5 cases of measles have been reported to Israel's Health Ministry - all of them in Jerusalem. All 5 cases were women ages 20-40. No other cases of measles have been reported. Measles is a highly contagious disease characterized by a fever, rash, and eye infection. It may also cause severe complications. The MMR vaccine (which does not cause autism, but which was feared due to rumors that it does so) is given at 1 year of age and again at age 6. Most cases of preventable vaccines originate in non-vaccinated people. The Health Ministry calls on Israelis to ensure their children are vaccinated on schedule. Those children who have missed vaccinations should contact the ministry and receive them as soon as possible. -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts [This report is sparse on details, but adds to the reports on the worldwide distribution of measles cases this year. A map of Israel can be found at . - Mod LK] [", "AVIAN INFLUENZA (112): LUXEMBOURG, POULTRY, HPAI H5N8 CONFIRMED, SPREAD *********************************************************************** A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Tue 6 Jun 2017 Source: Press release, Luxembourg Government, Ministry of Agriculture, Viticulture and Consumer Protection [in French, machine trans. edited] As of 6 Jun 2017, a 4th outbreak of bird flu was confirmed in a poultry farm in Rollingen/Mersch. All poultry present on the premises have been euthanized. In order to avoid spread of the disease to other livestock farms, all transport of live poultry and any exposure of poultry remains prohibited. Exceptionally, the transport of poultry directly to the slaughterhouse or from abroad to a holding may be authorized. This transport is subject to prior individual authorization from the Veterinary Services Administration (contact: 247-82539 /  ). As already announced in the press release of 2 Jun 2017: - It is recommended that poultry be kept indoors. All feeding and watering must be done inside the buildings. - Any suspicion of avian influenza (abnormal mortality, reduced consumption of food or water, sudden drop in egg laying) should be reported to a veterinarian. - Poultry industry professionals are reminded to respect biosecurity measures such as:  Limiting the access of people to livestock;  Wearing work clothes;  Regular cleaning and disinfection of infrastructure and equipment as well as means of transport in contact with live poultry. -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail [According to FAO's EMPRES Global Animal Disease Information System (EMPRES-i), 3 earlier avian influenza outbreaks affecting poultry in Luxembourg have been confirmed by the National Authorities as HPAI H5N8 (see ; go to \"Latest Events,\" 2 Jun 2017). The initial press release from Luxembourg, dated 2 Jun 2017, as cited by the media, was presented in ProMED post http://promedmail.org/post/20170602.5080342. This is Luxembourg's 1st event of avian influenza reported since 1956. According to article 1.1.3 of OIE's Terrestrial Animal Health Code, such events should be reported to the OIE by the \"Veterinary Authorities\" of the involved country \"within 24 hours.\" This should be done \"through the World Animal Health Information System (WAHIS), or by fax or email.\" HPAI H5N8 continues its circulation globally, though it should already have seasonally peaked. According to a media report from Zimbabwe, dated Mon 5 Jun 2017, a major poultry producer there has been hit by the virus, leading to the prescribed destruction of 140 000 birds (see  ). - Mod.AS A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  .] [", "CHOLERA, DIARRHEA AND DYSENTERY UPDATE (46): YEMEN ************************************************** A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Tue 6 Jun 2017 Source: Anadolu Agency [edited] At least 728 people have died since a cholera epidemic broke out in Yemen in late April 2017, according to the WHO. \"Over 91 400 suspected cholera cases have been recorded,\" the WHO's Yemen office said via Twitter on Tue 6 Jun 2017. The organization went on to urge the international community to step up efforts to contain the health crisis. Several international organizations -- including the WHO, UNICEF and the Red Cross -- have recently stepped up the delivery of medical supplies to Yemen, where local health authorities have struggled to cope with the outbreak. Local officials say that continued fighting between forces loyal to Yemen's Saudi-backed government -- currently based in the city of Aden -- and the Shia Houthi militia group have frustrated efforts to deal with the crisis. Impoverished Yemen has remained in a state of civil war since 2014, when the Houthis and their allies overran much of the country, including the capital Sanaa. In 2015, Saudi Arabia and its Arab allies launched a massive air campaign aimed at reversing Houthi military gains and shoring up Yemen's embattled government. [Byline: Ali Oweida] -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail [The statistics of the ongoing epidemic in Yemen in 2017 are: Date (2017) / Cases / Deaths 8 May / 1360 / 25 11 May / 2752 / 51 13 May / 8595 / 115 14 May / 11 000 / 180 17 May / 17 200 / 209 19 May / 23 500 / 242 21 May / 29 300 / 315 22 May / 35 217 / 361 24 May / 42 207 / 420 27 May / 51 832 / 471 30 May / 65 300 / 532 2 Jun / 73 700 / 605 4 Jun / 86 400 / 676 5 Jun / 91 400 / 728  - Mod.LL A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  .] [", "DENGUE/DHF UPDATE (06): AMERICAS, OBSERVATIONS, RESEARCH ******************************************************** A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases In this update: [1] Cases in various countries: Americas regional --- Cases in various countries not mentioned above or more recent case numbers. Mexico and Central America --- Mexico: - National - Michoac\u00e1n state Guatemala (Zacapa) Costa Rica Panama South America --- Argentina (Formosa province). Brazil Paraguay (Limpio, Central dept.) Peru: - National - Regions - Ancash coastal region - Cajamarca region - Pisco province, Ica region - Talara province, Piura region - Lambayeque region [2] Vaccine [3] Dengue 4 virus encephalitis [4] Dengue neutralizing antibodies ****** Cases in various countries Americas --- Americas Regional WHO/PAHO report 29 May 2017 Reported cases of dengue fever in the Americas, by country or territory to EW 20 of 2017. Cases reported earlier than EW 17 are not included here, but are available at the above URL. -------------------------------------- Cases by Country / Week updated / Probable / Conf. / Virus type / DHF severe / Deaths North America USA / 19 [week ending 12 May 2017] / 32 / 32 / D? / 0 / 0 Central America and Mexico Costa Rica / 19 [week ending 12 May 2017] / 1322 / 0 / D 1,2 / 0 / 0 El Salvador / 20 [week ending 19 May 2017] / 1399 / 36 / D2 / 16 / 0 Guatemala / 17 [week ending 28 Apr 2017] / 794 / 98 / D2 / 3 / 0 Honduras / 17 [week ending 28 Apr 2017] / 1657 / 0 / D? / 30 / 0 Mexico /19 [week ending 12 May 2017] / 2415 / 913 / D 1,2,3 / 297 / 3 Panama / 19 [week ending 12 May 2017] / 2416 / 802 / D1,2 / 7 / 0 Hispanic Caribbean Dominican Republic / 17 [week ending 28 Apr 2017] / 315 / 0 / D? / 15 / 0 Puerto Rico / 19 [week ending 12 May 2017] / 9 / 0 / D2 / 0 / 0 English, French, Dutch Caribbean American Virgin Islands / 19 [week ending 12 May 2017] / 1 / 1 / D? / 0 / 0 Andean Bolivia / 17 / [week ending 28 Apr 2017] / 4260 / 0 / D? / 34 / 0 Colombia / 20 [week ending 19 May 2017] / 12 552 / 8357 / D? / 131 / 36 Ecuador / 17 [week ending 28 Apr 2017] / 6075 / 6075 / D? / 6 / 3 Peru / 20 [week ending 19 May 2017] / 44 971 / 12 717 / D 2,3 / 137 / 54 Venezuela / 17 [week ending 28 Apr 2017] / 2722 / 309 / D? / 7 / 0 Southern Cone Argentina / 18 [week ending 5 May 2017] / 6283 / 156 / D1 / 0 / 0 Brazil / 19 [week ending 12 May 2018] / 144 326 / 0 / D? / 82 / 23 Chile / 19 [week ending 12 May 2017] / 5 / 5 / D2 / 0 / 0 Paraguay / 17 [week ending 28 Apr 2017] / 7514 / 201 / D1 / 0 / 0 [Maps showing the location of the affected islands and countries in the Americas mentioned above and below can be accessed at  ; North America at ; Central America at ; the Caribbean at and South America at . - Mod.TY] Cases in various countries not mentioned above or more recent case numbers. Mexico and Central America --- Mexico:  - National. 20 May 2017. As of week 19 (conf.) 1138 cases; States most affected: Chiapas 185 cases, Morelos 54 cases of which 35 DHF/serious cases; Dengue virus circulating types 1, 3. [in Spanish]  - Michoac\u00e1n state. 26 May 2017. (registered) 78 cases. [in Spanish]  Guatemala (Zacapa). 4 Jun 2017. (reported) 3 Feb-1 May 2017, 63 cases; DHF/serious 10 cases. [in Spanish] Costa Rica. 26 May 2017. (conf.) 1138 cases. Panama. 25 May 2017. (conf.) 980 cases; DHF/serious 4 cases [in Spanish] South America --- Argentina (Formosa province). 26 May 2017. (susp.) 300 cases, (conf.) 100 cases. [in Spanish] Brazil. 9 May 2017. As of 15 Apr 2017. (registered) 113 381 cases; Deaths 17 (compared to 1.18 million cases and 507 deaths in 2016) Paraguay (Limpio, Central dept.). 18 May 2017. (reported) more than 175 cases; Death (susp.) 1. [in Spanish] Peru:  - National. 30 May 2017. (reported) 44 971 cases; Deaths 54; Health emergency in regions: Piura, Tumbes, Lambayeque, La Libertad. [in Spanish]  - Regions. 28 May 2017. Piura region (conf.) 1811 cases with 28 deaths, La Libertad (conf.) 1308 cases, Lambayeque (cons.) 733 cases, Ancash region (reported) 1618 cases, (conf.) 618 cases with its province most affected Santa around 600 cases. [in Spanish] - Ancash coastal region. 31 May 2017. (reported) more than 500 cases. [in Spanish]  - Cajamarca region. 12 May 2017. (registered) 187 cases; District most affected: Chilete 71 cases. [in Spanish]  - Pisco province, Ica region. 10 May 2017. (conf.) 98 cases; Districts most affected: San Clemente 81 cases, 9 in Paracas, 6 in T\u00fapac Amaru Inca, 1 in Pisco y 1 in San Andr\u00e9s. [in Spanish]  - Talara province, Piura region. 10 May 2017. (conf.) 43 cases. [in Spanish]  - Lambayeque region. 9 May 2017. (conf. and probable) 1525 cases; Districts most affected: Tum\u00e1n 519 cases, La Victoria 67, Chiclayo 51, Jos\u00e9 Leonardo Ortiz 25. [in Spanish] -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail ****** [2] Neurologic complications Date: 11-12 May 2017 [from scientific congress] Source: Virol-mycol DOI: 10.4172/2161-0517-C1-020 [edited] Amita Jain. Neurologic complications of dengue virus infection --------------------------- Abstract Statement of the Problem: Dengue virus infection is an extremely common mosquito borne infection in the world. Neurologic complications are increasingly being reported in dengue cases affecting both the central and peripheral nervous system. This session is aimed to discuss the incidence and clinical spectrum of neurologic complications of dengue, methods of their diagnosis, management and outcome in patients with dengue virus infection. Methodology & Theoretical Orientation: An extensive review of the published literature was carried out using PubMed, Scopus and Google Scholar databases. The keywords used were: \"Dengue AND Neurological\", \"Dengue AND Neuropathy\", \"Dengue AND Plexopathy\", \"Dengue AND Acute Encephalitis Syndrome\", \"Dengue AND Encephalopathy\". Findings: The neurologic manifestations may be seen in 0.5-7.4 percent of dengue cases. These include encephalopathy, encephalitis, aseptic meningitis, stroke (intracranial hemorrhages or thrombosis), myelitis, Guillain-Barr\u00e9 syndrome, plexus involvement (brachial plexopathy, neuralgic amyotrophy, lumbosacral plexoopathy), nerve involvement (mononeuropathies, polyneuropathies) and muscle involvement (myalgias, myositis, rhabdomyolysis, hypokalemic paralysis). Diagnosis of dengue virus infection may be made by a combination of dengue NS1Ag/Real Time PCR and anti-IgM antibody in CSF. In serum samples, dengue infection may be confirmed by PCR/culture positivity, IgM detection or by 4-fold rise in titers of specific IgG antibodies in paired serum samples. Conclusion & Significance: In endemic regions, dengue should be considered as a differential diagnosis of neurological disorders. Early recognition of these complications is required for proper management of cases and for preventing further disabilities. -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts [As indicated in this report and the one following it, dengue virus infections should be considered among the rule-outs for neurological disorders in patients who recently have been in areas of dengue virus transmission. - Mod.TY] ****** [3] Dengue 4 virus encephalitis Date: Thu 4 May 2017 Source: PLoS Neglected Tropical Diseases [edited] Deborah H. L. Ng, Sapna P. Sadarangani. \"Locked in a cage\"--A case of dengue virus 4 encephalitis. --------------------------- A 62-year-old Chinese woman was admitted to the hospital with a 4-day history of fever associated with chills, rigors, and headache. She also complained of postural giddiness, 5 episodes of vomiting, and shortness of breath on exertion for one day. She denied any abdominal pain or bleeding manifestations. Her past medical history was unremarkable, and she had not travelled out of Singapore. [Clinical details are presented followed by a discussion] The presenting case Our patient with DENV-4 infection developed new acute neurological symptoms of confusion and expressive aphasia at day 6 of her acute dengue illness. CSF showed lymphocytic pleocytosis with a positive CSF dengue IgM and IgG. Testing for other pathogens in CSF was negative. She had not travelled to areas endemic for other flaviviruses. Although DENV-4 has been reported to potentially cause encephalitis, those cases were fatal, with multiorgan involvement and dengue haemorrhagic fever. By contrast, our patient had no other features of severe dengue, such as severe plasma leakage, bleeding, or other organ impairment. This is the 1st known case of DENV-4 encephalitis with complete recovery. Key learning points - Dengue encephalitis is rare, but clinicians should be aware of the diagnostic criteria and consider the diagnosis in endemic areas. - In areas that are also endemic for other flaviviruses, co-infection needs to be differentiated from cross-reactive serology. - Brain imaging may be helpful but does not confirm or exclude the diagnosis of dengue encephalitis by itself, and CSF analysis for dengue PCR and serology is also important. - Pathogenesis of neurological manifestations of dengue leading to encephalitis are incompletely understood but could include direct neural invasion with intrathecal antibody synthesis or alterations in the blood-brain barrier. -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts [This report will be of interest to infectious disease physicians and neurologists attending patients in dengue endemic areas. - Mod.TY] ****** [4] Dengue neutralizing antibodies Date: Mon 15 May 2017 Source: PLoS Neglected Tropical Diseases [edited] Bhumi Patel, Patti Longo, Michael J. Miley, Magelda Montoya, Eva Harris, Aravinda M. de Silva. Dissecting the human serum antibody response to secondary dengue virus infections. --------------------------- Abstract Dengue viruses (DENVs) are mosquito-borne flaviviruses and the causative agents of dengue fever and dengue hemorrhagic fever. As there are 4 serotypes of DENV (DENV1-4), people can be infected multiple times, each time with a new serotype. Primary infections stimulate antibodies that mainly neutralize the serotype of infection (type-specific), whereas secondary infections stimulate responses that cross-neutralize 2 or more serotypes. Previous studies have demonstrated that neutralizing antibodies induced by primary infections recognize tertiary and quaternary structure epitopes on the viral envelope (E) protein that are unique to each serotype. The goal of the current study was to determine the properties of neutralizing antibodies induced after secondary infection with a different (heterotypic) DENV serotypes. We evaluated whether polyclonal neutralizing antibody responses after secondary infections consist of distinct populations of type-specific antibodies to each serotype encountered or a new population of broadly cross-neutralizing antibodies. We observed 2 types of responses: in some individuals exposed to secondary infections, DENV neutralization was dominated by cross-reactive antibodies, whereas in other individuals both type-specific and cross-reactive antibodies contributed to neutralization. To better understand the origins of type-specific and cross-reactive neutralizing antibodies, we analyzed sera from individuals with well-documented sequential infections with 2 DENV serotypes only. These individuals had both type-specific and cross-reactive neutralizing antibodies to the 2 serotypes responsible for infection and only cross-reactive neutralizing antibodies to other serotypes. Collectively, the results demonstrate that the quality of neutralizing (and presumably protective) antibodies are different in individuals depending on the number of previous exposures to different DENV serotypes. We propose a model in which low affinity, cross-reactive antibody secreting B-cell clones induced by primary exposure evolve during each secondary infection to secrete higher affinity and more broadly neutralizing antibodies. Author summary The 4 dengue virus serotypes are emerging mosquito-borne flaviviruses and the causative agents of dengue fever and dengue hemorrhagic fever/dengue shock syndrome. Infected people develop protective immunity to the infecting serotype but remain susceptible to secondary infections with new serotypes. Both antibodies and T-cells are responsible for protection against re-infection by the same serotype. The goal of the current study was to analyze the properties of antibodies in people who have been exposed to a single or secondary dengue virus infections. We found that people exposed to a single infection have neutralizing antibodies that mainly bind sites that are unique to the infecting serotype. In contrast, secondary infections induced more complex mixtures of neutralizing antibodies that target regions that unique to each serotype and regions that are conserved between serotypes. Our results have implications for understanding protective responses after natural infections as well as responses induced by dengue vaccines. -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail [This finding will be very relevant to an understanding of immune responses to the dengue vaccines currently under development. The intent for development of these tetravalent vaccines is to provide neutralizing antibody with solid immunity concurrently to all 4 DENV serotypes. - Mod.TY] [", "PLAGUE - USA (06): (NEW MEXICO) ******************************* A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Mon 5 Jun 2017 5:24pm Source: Associated Press [edited] The state Department of Health has reported the 1st human case of plague in New Mexico in 2017. Health officials say a 63-year-old Santa Fe County man is currently hospitalized with the bacterial disease. They are conducting an environmental investigation at the man's home to look for ongoing risk and ensure the health of his immediate family and neighbors. Health Department staff also is going door-to-door near the man's home to inform them about plague found in the area and educate them on reducing their risk. Plague generally is transmitted to humans through the bites of infected fleas, but can be transmitted by direct contact with infected animals including rodents, wildlife and pets. So far there have been 10 dogs and 5 cats with confirmed plague in New Mexico in 2017. -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts [The manifestations of _Yersinia pestis_ infection in this case, the 1st for 2017, are not stated in the report but it is likely to have been bubonic plague. 2015 was a \"banner year\" for _Y. pestis_ infections in the USA with 15 cases and 4 deaths. In recent decades, an average of 7 human plague cases have been reported each year (range: 1-17 cases per year) with 0-2 deaths. The following was extracted from: Prentice MB, Rahalison L. Plague. Lancet. 2007; 369(9568): 1196-207, with the citations removed: \"Some plague cases (10-25 percent) present with primary septicemia (hypotension, shock) without lymph nodes being obviously affected and these patients have higher mortality than those with bubonic plague. The term septicemic plague can be confusing, since most patients with buboes have detectable bacteremia at some stage and can also have high-density bacteremia with systemic signs of sepsis. Debate about whether septicemic plague is always secondary to frank or subclinical bubonic or pneumonic disease continues, but work in mice lends support to the existence of a syndrome of septicemic disease without histological changes in lymph nodes in a few animals infected by flea bites.\" - Mod.LL] [Plague may infect human beings through several routes: 1) the bite of an infected flea carried by a rodent or, rarely, other animals (mentioned previously; 2) direct contact with contaminated tissues, generally from an animal; or 3) in rare cases, inhalation of respiratory secretions from infected people or animals. Clinical signs in pets involve a localized swelling, such as under the jaw in cats, but also in the inguinal region or under the front leg (the armpit, if you will), lethargy, anorexia, and fever. These clinical signs may be present in the dog as well. Swelling under the jaw in cats is frequently mistaken as a cat fight abscess. Please take your pet to a veterinarian if you notice any abnormalities. Be sure to consult your veterinarian if you find a lump on your pet, as well as to get the best flea prevention treatment for your pet. It may be necessary to have your yard and/or home treated for fleas. Vacuum your home, including any bedding and furniture, and immediately upon finishing take the vacuum back outside, seal it in a plastic bag, and dispose of it. This type of cleaning will have to be repeated every week for 4-6 weeks to break the cycle of the flea in the home. This disease should be taken seriously, so please be sure your pet is on some form of flea prevention. - Mod.TG A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  .] [", "LASSA FEVER - WEST AFRICA (20): NIGERIA *************************************** A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Fri 2 Jun 2017 Source: Nigeria Centre for Disease Control [NCDC] Weekly Epidemiological Report 7(20) [edited] Lassa fever ----------- Please note that the data reflects the routine reports, that is, all suspected cases, including the laboratory positive and negative cases 1. 4 suspected cases of Lassa fever with one laboratory confirmed and 2 deaths (CFR [case fatality rate], 50.0 percent) were reported from 4 LGAs [local government areas] (3 states) in week 20, 2017 [week ending 19 May 2017], compared with zero during the same period in 2016. 2. Lassa fever (Plateau - 1), 3 negatives (Cross River - 1, Nasarawa - 1 and Plateau - 1). 3. Between weeks 1-20 (2017) [1 Jan-19 May 2017], 262 suspected Lassa fever cases with 59 laboratory confirmed cases and 48 deaths (CFR, 18.32 percent) from 54 LGAs (20 states) were reported compared with 658 suspected cases with 63 laboratory confirmed cases and 75 deaths (CFR, 11.40 percent) from 122 LGAs (27 states) during the same period in 2016 (Figure 1 [all figures are available at the source URL above]). 4. Between weeks 1-52 2016, 921 suspected Lassa fever cases with 109 laboratory confirmed cases and 119 deaths (CFR, 12.92 percent) from 144 LGAs (28 states and FCT [Federal Capital Territory]) were reported compared with 430 suspected cases with 25 laboratory confirmed cases and 40 deaths (CFR, 9.30 percent) from 37 LGAs (14 states and FCT) during the same period in 2015 (Figure 2). 5. Investigation and active case search ongoing in affected States with coordination of response activities by the NCDC, with support from partners. 5.1 National Lassa Fever Working Group meeting and weekly National Surveillance and Outbreak Response meeting on-going at NCDC to keep abreast of the current Lassa fever situation in the country. 5.2 Response materials for VHFs [viral haemorrhagic fevers] prepositioned across the country by NCDC at the beginning of the dry season; 5.3 New VHF guidelines have been developed by the NCDC (Interim National Viral Haemorrhagic Fevers Preparedness guidelines and Standard Operating Procedures for Lassa fever management). 5.4 Ongoing reclassification of reported Lassa fever cases. 5.5 Ongoing review of the variables for case-based surveillance for VHF [viral hemorrhagic fever]. 5.6 VHF case-based forms completed by affected states are being entered into the new VHF management system. This system allows for the creation of a VHF database for the country. 5.7 Confirmed cases are being treated at identified treatment/isolation centres across the states with ribavirin and necessary supportive management also instituted. 5.8 Onsite support was earlier provided to Ogun, Nasarawa, Taraba, Ondo, and Borno states by the NCDC and partners. 5.9 Offsite support provided by NCDC/partners in all affected states. 5.10 States are enjoined to intensify surveillance Figure 1: Map of Nigeria showing area affected by Lassa fever, week 1-20, 2016 and 2017 Figure 2: Map of Nigeria showing areas affected by Lassa fever, week 1-53, 2015 and week 1-52, 2016 Table of cases by state, cumulative data weeks 1-20 [1 Jan-19 May 2017]: State: Cases / Lab Confirmed / Deaths Adamawa: 6 / 0 / 2 Bauchi: 9 / 3 / 3 Cross River: 6 / 0 / 0 Ebonyi: 4 / 1 / 1 Edo: 91 / 20 / 9 Enugu: 1 / 1 / 1 FCT: 2 / 0 / 0 Gombe: 15 / 0 / 1 Jigawa: 1 / 0 / 0 Kadun: 1 / 0 / 0 Kano: 23 / 2 / 10 Kebbi: 1 / 0 / 1 Kogi: 2 / 1 / 1 Nasarawa: 28 / 6 / 2 Ogun: 8 / 1 / 0 Ondo: 13 / 6 / 2 Plateau: 7 / 5 / 5 Rivers: 6 / 1 / 0 Taraba: 37 / 12 / 9 Yobe: 1 / 0 / 1 262 59 48 Total: 262 / 59 / 48 -- Communicated by: Olutayo Olajide Babalobi Lecturer and Consultant Epizootiologist (One Health, Participatory Epizootiology and Veterinary ICT Research Group) Department of Veterinary Public Health and Preventive Medicine Faculty of Veterinary Medicine University of Ibadan Ibadan, Nigeria [Dr. Babalobi is thanked for sending in this report. Numbers of cases of Lassa fever are continuing to slowly increase in Nigeria. As noted in earlier comments, Lassa fever remains a problem in Nigeria because the virus is endemic there. Virus transmission to humans occurs when people are in contact with the reservoir rodent host, the multimammate mouse (in the genus _Mastomys_) or their excreta. Transmission also occurs in health facilities when personal protective equipment is not employed and barrier nursing practices are not adequate to protect staff from blood and secretions of infected patients. Also, as noted in earlier posts, prevention and control of Lassa fever in nature depends on control of the rodent reservoir, which occurs across Nigeria and beyond. Reduction of populations of this rodent will require active participation at the village level. That will necessitate mounting a public education program with support of rodent control technicians. Preventing entry of rodents into the home and keeping food materials tightly covered are helpful measures to prevent infection. Elimination of these rodents completely is probably not possible. Images of _Mastomys_ mice can be seen at  . Maps of Nigeria can be accessed at  and  . - Mod.TY] [", "HEPATITIS A - AUSTRALIA: FROZEN BERRIES, LINK TO 2015 CLUSTER, ALERT, RECALL **************************************************************************** A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Mon 5 Jun 2017 Source: Choice [edited] Sparking the 2nd nationwide frozen berry recall after a previous outbreak in 2015, 4 cases of hepatitis A have been linked to Creative Gourmet's Mixed Berries. Supplier Entyce Foods has initiated a recall of 48 000 Creative Gourmet's Mixed Berries in 300 gram packs, most of which were sold at independent supermarkets by March 2017. Entyce stopped sales of the suspect berries after the 1st reported case on 4 May 2017, but the actual recall did not start until a month later on 3 Jun 2017. The authority overseeing the recall, Food Standards Australia and New Zealand, has confirmed that 4 people have been affected in states including Queensland, Victoria, and South Australia. The berries are believed to be linked to the same stock reserves responsible for the last hepatitis A scare in 2015, when both Nanna's range of frozen berries and Creative Gourmet Mixed Berries were owned by the same company. \"We purchased the Creative Gourmet brand and some existing stock reserves from Patties in late 2015,\" says Ivone Ruiz, the General Manager of Entyce Food Ingredients. \"The stock had been extensively tested by independent accredited laboratories, all of which cleared the batch for traces of the hepatitis A.\" But Food Standards Australia and New Zealand suggests the batches are related. \"These cases have an identical sequence [of hepatitis A] to that of the cases from the 2015 outbreak,\" says a spokesperson. \"This product was not in the market at the time of the 2015 recall.\" A representative from the Department of Health and Human Services in Victoria suggests how the batch could have evaded testing. \"There is a possible link. They came in at a similar time to [Nanna's] berries, but they came in before the test-and-hold [procedures were] put in place at the border,\" spokesperson Bram Alexander tells CHOICE. Creative Gourmet Mixed Berries contain strawberries, raspberries and blackberries from China, as well as blueberries sourced from Canada. The berries are packaged in China before being shipped to Australia and are then repackaged in Melbourne. Entyce says it's decreasing its reliance on berries sourced from China having recognized \"a level of concern that exists in the community\". \"When we took over the Creative Gourmet brand, over 95 percent of the fruit was sourced from China; we have brought this figure down to 5 percent,\" Entyce's Ruiz tells CHOICE. \"With a number of sourcing contracts expected to cease shortly, 100 percent of all fruit used in the Creative Gourmet brand will be sourced from Canada, Chile, Brazil and Vietnam.\" The recalled batch of Creative Gourmet Mixed Berries carries the number PP150118, and has a best by date of 15 Jan 2021. The packs were sold at independent supermarkets including IGA, Foodworks, Foodland, SPAR, and Supabarn, among others. People are advised to return all packets -- whether sealed or opened -- to the place of purchase for a full refund. [Byline: Tony Ibrahim] -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts [It is interesting that the virus seems linked genetically to an outbreak from more than 2 years ago. The following was extracted from ProMED post Hepatitis A - Italy: frozen berries http://promedmail.org/post/20140919.2784633 containing a Eurosurveillance report on the outbreak of hepatitis associated with frozen berries in Europe (Eurosurveillance Edition 2014, 19(37): pii=20906;  ), with the citations within the report removed: \"Consumption of fresh or frozen produce is known to be associated with outbreaks of foodborne enteric viruses, particularly norovirus and HAV. Produce (fruits and vegetables) can become contaminated during cultivation prior to harvest due to contact with inadequately treated sewage or sewage-polluted water, or fomites. Contamination may also occur by infected food handlers, during harvesting, processing, storage, distribution, or final preparation, with the virus likely to be found on the surface of the food. Fruits and vegetables are more prone to being vehicles of food-borne infections, as they are more likely to be left uncooked before consumption. Berries as a vehicle for transmission of HAV have been described in several outbreaks, with most of the infections connected to consumption of minimally processed frozen berries. \"Furthermore, it has been shown that among berries (frozen raspberries in particular) and vegetables (that is, parsley), those with uneven shapes are more likely to retain viruses on their surface. Raspberries, for example, have crevices and hair-like projections, which may prevent the virus from being removed by rinsing. \"Recently, outbreaks connected to berry consumption have been reported in some Nordic European countries (Denmark, Finland, Norway, and Sweden) and in the United States. The outbreak in Nordic countries was associated with frozen strawberries, while the outbreak in the United States was associated with Townsend Farms Organic Antioxidant Blend, a frozen blend containing a pomegranate seed mix. However, the virus genotype 1A isolated in a 2014 Italian outbreak was different from the virus genotypes implicated in the above mentioned recent outbreaks (genotype 1B), which also have frozen strawberries and berries as the suspected vehicles.\" - Mod.LL A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  .] [", "INVASIVE MOSQUITO - USA (02): (NEBRASKA) **************************************** A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Tue 6 Jun 2017 Source: The Plattsmouth Journal [edited] The month of June brings warmer temperatures and an ample supply of moisture; 2 ingredients that can lead to high mosquito populations right in our own back yards, according to Dr. Theodore Burk, Creighton University entomologist. Of special concern this year [2017] is a recent mosquito invader known as the Asian Tiger mosquito (_Aedes albopictus_), which, according to Burk, has potential to be a carrier of the infamous Zika virus, which has plagued South Florida, Texas and other subtropical regions of the United States. Dr. Burk says the Asian Tiger mosquito also has been recorded in Southeast Nebraska. What remains a greater concern in the Midwest is the West Nile Virus (WNV), carried by the Northern House mosquito (_Culex pipiens_ and _Culex tarsalis_), with a total of 94 reported cases since 2012 in Nebraska alone, and 2038 cases reported nationwide, according to the Centers for Disease Control. Dr. Burk believes that the best prevention from contracting mosquito-borne illness is to reduce standing water, where mosquitoes can hatch and become adults within 7 to 10 days. He offers the following precautionary measures: - Get rid of potential mosquito-breeding sites by emptying standing water from flower pots, buckets and barrels. - Change water in pet dishes regularly and replace the water in bird baths weekly. - Drill holes in tire swings so water drains out. Keep children's wading pools empty and on their sides when they aren't being used. - Plant mosquito-repelling vegetation such as lavender, catnip, lemon balm, citronella, peppermint or basil. - Wear light-colored or white clothing, as mosquitoes are more attracted to dark clothing. Long sleeves and pants also can help deter bites. - Use insect repellent that contains the chemical [DEET]. An effective alternative is a non-[DEET] mixture of lemon oil and eucalyptus, which also can be found over-the-counter. - Mosquitoes that carry the WNV are most active at dusk and dawn. Limit time outdoors during these hours. - Make sure you have good screens on your windows and doors to keep mosquitoes out. At its worst, some people develop severe symptoms from WNV including high fever, headache, neck stiffness, stupor, disorientation, coma, tremors, convulsions, muscle weakness, vision loss, numbness and paralysis. Others have less severe symptoms such as fever, headache, body aches, nausea, vomiting and sometimes swollen lymph glands or skin rash on the chest, stomach and back. Dr. Burk notes that most people who are infected with the virus will not show any symptoms at all. \"The main, peak wave of infection passed through a few years ago, but we still have cases every year. Most of them are asymptomatic, but occasionally cases can be severe and lead to serious conditions like arthritis or other long-lasting, lingering problems,\" said Burk. [WNV infections can lead to encephalitis and death. Survivors of encephalitis can suffer neurologic sequelae. - Mod.TY] [Byline: Patti Jo Peterson] -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts [The above report does not say when _Ae. albopictus_ was 1st discovered in Nebraska. The eggs of this mosquito can enter into diapause and survive winter conditions. This mosquito has been extending its range northward, and this extension is expected to continue as winter temperature rise over time. It has been recently found in the northern states of Ohio and Indiana. Although _Ae. albopictus_ is a Zika virus vector, because it is not a strict human biter, unlike _Ae. aegypti_, it is not as great a risk for infecting people as is _Ae. aegypti_. Fortunately, _Ae. aegypti_ does not occur in Nebraska. West Nile virus is endemic in Nebraska, as the above report indicates, will continue to cause sporadic cases of disease in humans and equine animals. - Mod.TY A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  .] [", "CHOLERA, DIARRHEA AND DYSENTERY UPDATE (47): AFRICA *************************************************** A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases In this update: [1] Cholera - Somaliland (Togdheer region) [2] Cholera - Kenya (Nakuru county) [3] Cholera - Sudan [4] Cholera - East Africa ****** [1] Cholera - Somaliland (Togdheer region) Date: Fri 2 Jun 2017 Source: Goobjoog [edited] More than 1000 people have been infected with cholera disease in Burco town located in Togdheer province in the breakaway Somaliland. Currently many of the infected people are given medical attention under tree shades. The outbreak of the disease has resulted in Burco town termed as medical emergency area. Speaking to the media, Mohamed Yussuf Muraad, the mayor of Burco town said they stationed medical staff at the major entries of the town to provide medical service to those leaving or coming into the town. Responding to the medical emergency, the mayor said they are in collaboration with the Ministry of Health, Education and the diverse security personnel stationed in the province and ensuring quick implementation of public hygiene awareness. \"We decided from this hour that Burco town is under medical emergency situation and to redouble the awareness campaign on entry points to the town where some of our medical staff is stationed\" said the Mayor. The ongoing school examinations has been stopped in Burco town and all the students in primary, secondary schools and higher institutions were sent home in order to curtail the spread of the disease. Major rendezvous places in the town have been banned too for the local people to gather for chatting for medical reasons. -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts ****** [2] Cholera - Kenya (Nakuru county) Date: Sun 4 Jun 2017, 3:00 PM Source: The Star [edited] A cholera outbreak has been reported in Naivasha with 1 patient admitted at the sub-county hospital. The male patient has been placed in an isolation ward. He was rushed to the facility complaining of abdominal pain and diarrhea. Following the outbreak, officers from the department of public health have been deployed in the area to contain the outbreak. The patient's house has been disinfected. The move comes barely a week after the department of public health banned food hawking outside the hospital. The department has also outlawed the dropping and picking of passengers at the hospital's gate by both matatus and motorcycle operators. According to the superintendent in charge of the hospital Joseph Mburu, the patient was responding well to treatment. He added that cholera tests conducted had turned out to be positive and said this was the 1st case in the town. \"Last week we had 2 cases of a woman and mother and her child but tests turned negative and they have since been discharged,\" he said. \"We are working with the department of public health to make sure that the ban on food hawking mainly around the hospital gate is [put into] effect,\" said Mburu. Meanwhile, the county government has moved in to rehabilitate [and] open up the clogged drainage systems in Naivasha town. This came as heavy rains continued to pound the town and its environs flooding major roads and adversely affecting the flow of traffic. According to Naivasha sub-county administrator Julius Nyaata, the exercise would target all major drainage systems in the town. [Byline: George Murage] -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts ****** [3] Cholera - Sudan Date: Tue 6 Jun 2017 Source: ReliefWeb, a Radio Dabanga report [edited] Cholera cases are further proliferating in Khartoum and White Nile states. The Health Ministry recorded 30 new cases while local sources reported about 100 infected patients in areas of Khartoum Bahri. Cholera in Khartoum has further expanded to Teibat El Ahamda, known as El Ezba, in Khartoum Bahri. On [Mon 5 Jun 2017], the number of dead from cholera rose to 18 people, while there were approximately 100 infected cases in the district's hospitals on [Sun 4 and Mon 5 Jun 2017]. The Ministry of Health in Khartoum state announced on [Mon 5 Jun 2017], that 30 new cases have been recorded. There will be \"maximum mobilisation\" at Teibat El Ahamda area, with cleaning and waste removal campaigns. H.I., a resident of El Ezba told this station that his sister died of cholera, while his 2 brothers were infected with the disease. \"El Hadj El Safi and El Amel hospitals refused to receive my brothers, forcing us to transfer them to the academic hospital in Khartoum.\" He said that his brothers have recovered from the disease in time. \"However, the isolation centre in the academic hospital is overcrowded with patients, where 2 patients share one bed.\" Health workers in El Ban Jadeed Hospital said that the number of cholera patients there has amounted to more than 30 infected people, allegedly including foreigners. Here, too, hospital rooms are overcrowded with patients and the shortage of beds forces people to share beds. Doctors in the Sudanese capital reported 120 new cholera cases over the weekend, [3 to 4 Jun 2017]. In a press conference in Khartoum on [Sun 4 Jun 2017], Dr El Fateh Ali El Hassan said that the Tamayoz Hospital and departments of the Khartoum Teaching Hospital received 48 new cases on [Fri 2 and Sat 3 Jun 2017]. Hospitals in Omdurman admitted 20 cases. Reports of some hospitals in Khartoum refusing to admit cholera patients surfaced during the past week [week of 29 May to 4 Jun 2017]. The Sudanese Communist Party urged the Sudanese government to take its responsibility and declare \"a cholera epidemic\" in order to receive aid from abroad. Federal Health Minister Bahar Idris Abugarda told parliament on [Thu 1 Jun 2017], that between August 2016 and May 2017 the Ministry recorded 14 659 people infected with \"watery diarrhea\". A total of 292 patients died of watery diarrhea, the term the government has used for cholera since the 1st cases were registered in Blue Nile state in September 2016. Spreading to eastern Sudan, and later to the Northern State and central Sudan's El Gezira, the disease reached White Nile state in April 2017, where a rapid spread of cholera is reported. Hospitals in North Kordofan started to receive cholera patients as well. Abdelrahman El Siddig, the head of civil society organisations in White Nile said that 5 new cases of cholera were received by health centres in Ulad Makin. These people have been transferred to El Gezira Aba and Asalaya. The isolation centre in Asalaya has been reopened to accommodate and receive new cases of cholera, a week after its closure, El Siddig said. The hospital in El Duweim, White Nile, recorded a new cholera case on [Mon 5 Jun 2017]. The number of hospitalized cases at El Duweim's isolation centre has run up to 7 people. \"Medical staff and volunteers of the Sudanese Red Crescent Society in the local hospital are working hard\" said an activist, reporting to Radio Dabanga there is a decrease in the incidences of cholera in El Duweim after witnessing an increase in the past few days. Journalist El Tahir El Doma told Radio Dabanga that the El Gezira Aba Hospital received a case from El Dibeibat. \"The clinic in El Maraabi received 7 cases. Most of them come from the nearby villages.\" He added that the situation in Kosti \"seems to be contained\". The Minister of Health, Bahr Idris Abugarda, said that White Nile state has been one of the states stricken the most with the disease. Abugarda denied that the federal Ministry of Health was covering up the emergence of watery diarrhea. Abugarda responded to a question posed by independent MP Ahmad Sabah El Kheir about cholera in parliament. He replied that the doctors' response was quick and has contained the disease from the start with support teams. He said that there has been \"a wide mobilization of all people in mosques and districts, along with the armed forces, for awareness and guidance\" in combating the spread of the disease. The measures have shown positive results therein, according to the Health Minister. -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail ****** [4] Cholera - East Africa Date: Fri 2 Jun 2017, 5:58 PM Source: Africa Times [edited] WHO officials say an \"unprecedented\" outbreak of cholera in Somalia is linked to the drought that began in October 2016, creating widespread shortages of clean drinking water and food. There are more than 40 000 suspected cases since the beginning of 2017, with nearly 700 deaths to date, according to WHO numbers discussed in the British medical journal The Lancet on [Fri 2 Jun 2017]. \"Cholera is endemic in Somalia, but Abdinasir Abubakar, an epidemiologist with WHO, said 'the severity and extent of the current outbreak is unprecedented,'\" writes author Andrew Green. Abubakar said the cholera crisis has now reached 75 percent of regions in the country though new case totals may be slowing. The death toll in Somalia's cholera outbreak was expected to double by the end of June 2017, United Nations officials. In the adjacent Somali region of Ethiopia, where 90 percent of the nation's acute watery diarrhea (AWD) reports are concentrated, there have been 33 000 such cases and 776 deaths, according to WHO. Government health officials in Ethiopia have not confirmed that those cases are actually diagnosed as cholera. \"There is also the risk of international spread due to cross-border movement between Somalia, Kenya, and South Sudan, which are also experiencing the effects of the drought,\" the WHO said in last week's update on outbreaks across the continent. Nearly half of all counties in South Sudan have reported new cases in recent weeks, as the number of suspected cholera cases approaches 8000. Tanzania also continues to recover from its 2nd-worst cholera outbreak ever recorded, and the worst to hit the nation in 20 years. -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail [The mortality from cholera and most diarrheal illnesses is related to non-replacement of fluid and electrolytes from the diarrheal illness. As stated in Lutwick LI, Preis J, Choi P: Cholera. In: Chronic illness and disability: the pediatric gastrointestinal tract. Greydanus DE, Atay O, Merrick J (eds). NY: Nova Bioscience, 2017 (in press), oral rehydration therapy can be life-saving in outbreaks of cholera and other forms of diarrhea: \"As reviewed by Richard Guerrant et al (1), it was in 1831 that cholera treatment could be accomplished by intravenous replacement, and, although this therapy could produce dramatic improvements, not until 1960 was it 1st recognized that there was no true destruction of the intestinal mucosa, and gastrointestinal rehydration therapy could be effective, and the therapy could dramatically reduce the intravenous needs for rehydration. Indeed, that this rehydration could be just as effective given orally as through an orogastric tube (for example, refs 2 and 3) made it possible for oral rehydration therapy (ORT) to be used in rural remote areas and truly impact on the morbidity and mortality of cholera. Indeed, Guerrant et al (1) highlights the use of oral glucose-salt packets in war-torn Bangladeshi refugees, which reduced the mortality rate from 30 per cent to 3.6 per cent (4) and quotes sources referring to ORT as \"potentially the most important medical advance\" of the 20th century. A variety of formulations of ORT exist, generally glucose or rice powder-based, which contain a variety of micronutrients, especially zinc (5). \"The assessment of the degree of volume loss in those with diarrhea to approximate volume and fluid losses can be found in ref 6 below. Those with severe hypovolemia should be initially rehydrated intravenously with a fluid bolus of normal saline or Ringer's lactate solution of 20-30 ml/kg followed by 100 ml/kg in the 1st 4 hours and 100 ml/kg over the next 18 hours with regular reassessment. Those with lesser degrees of hypovolemia can be rehydrated orally with a glucose or rice-derived formula with up to 4 liters in the 1st 4 hours, and those with no hypovolemia can be given ORT after each liquid stool with frequent reevaluation.\" References ---------- 1. Guerrant RL, Carneiro-Filho BA, Dillingham RA. Cholera, diarrhea, and oral rehydration therapy: triumph and indictment. Clin Infect Dis. 2003;37(3):398-405. 2. Gregorio GV, Gonzales ML, Dans LF, Martinez EG. Polymer-based oral rehydration solution for treating acute watery diarrhoea. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2009;(2):CD006519. doi: 10.1002/14651858.CD006519.pub2. 3. Gore SM, Fontaine O, Pierce NF. Impact of rice based oral rehydration solution on stool output and duration of diarrhea: meta-analysis of 13 clinical trials. BMJ 1992; 304(6822): 287-91. 4. Mahalanabis D, Choudhuri AB, Bagchi NG, Bhattacharya AK, Simpson TW. Oral fluid therapy of cholera among Bangladesh refugees. Johns Hopkins Med. 1973; 132(4): 197-205. 5. Atia AN, Buchman AL. Oral rehydration solutions in non-cholera diarrhea: a review. Am J Gastroenterol. 2009; 104(10): 2596-604, doi: 10.1038/ajg.2009.329. 6. WHO. The treatment of diarrhea, a manual for physicians and other senior health workers. 4th ed. 2005. - Mod.LL A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  ,  ,  ,  .] [", "ANTHRAX - NIGERIA: (KEBBI) LIVESTOCK VACCINATION PROGRAM ******************************************************** A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Wed 7 Jun 2017 Source: Nta.ng [edited] The Kebbi State Government says it has vaccinated over 1.2 million livestock against suspected anthrax infection coming in from the neighbouring Benin Republic. Alhaji Adamu Ngaski, the state Commissioner for Animal Health, Husbandry and Fisheries, said this on [Tue 6 Jun 2017] at a news briefing, organised by NUJ in Birnin Kebbi. Ngaski said that the Ministry of Animal Health had embarked on livestock vaccination in the areas so as to prevent the contagious animal disease from spreading to the state and other parts of the country. \"We considered the fact that Arewa, Bagudo and Dandi Local Government Areas are bordering Benin Republic; hence the vaccination campaign as a measure to ward off suspected anthrax infections from Benin Republic,'' he said. According to him, 1.2 million cattle, 500 dogs, 600 sheep and 500 goats have so far been vaccinated. Besides, the commissioner said that the state government would soon start artificial insemination of livestock, adding that livestock consumption had increased because of the livestock business pact which the state had with Lagos State. \"We also have plans to boost the production of fisheries and poultry products, as 10 rivers in Argungu, Birnin Kebbi, Bunza, Zuru and Yauri areas have been identified for breeding fingerlings. The fingerlings would be released into main rivers after 6 months to enable our fishermen to produce fish for the people's consumption,'' he said. Ngaski added that the state government had earmarked about N600 million [approx. 943 341 USD] in the 2017 budget for the programmes. He also said that 25 hectares of land had been demarcated as cattle grazing reserves in the state. \"We will provide veterinary clinics and hospitals for herdsmen there to promote animal and human health; the project will curtail herdsmen-farmers clashes,'' he said. He, however, warned meat sellers from acquiring beef from outside the state, stressing that the people's health would not be compromised. He said that anybody who flouted the regulation would be dealt with according to the law. [Byline: Suleiman Idris] -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts [Kebbi is in the NW corner of Nigeria bordering both Benin & Niger; see: . Nigeria has not reported an outbreak of livestock anthrax since 2004 and their vaccination has at best been minimal. On the other hand, Benin has reported outbreaks in Boukouba province regularly since 2007, but that province is on their NW border with Togo. OIE has had no recent anthrax notifications from Benin so all one might presume is that the Nigerians are aware of something in neighbouring Benin which has yet to be formally revealed. Or Alhaji Adamu Ngaski, the state Commissioner for Animal Health, Husbandry and Fisheries, is up for re-election. - Mod.MHJ A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  .] [", "CHOLERA, DIARRHEA AND DYSENTERY UPDATE (48): YEMEN ************************************************** A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Wed 7 Jun 2017 Source: Anadolu Agency [edited] At least 746 people have died since a cholera epidemic broke out in Yemen in late April 2017, according to the WHO. In a Twitter post on Wed 7 Jun 2017, the WHO's Yemen office said more than 96 000 suspected cases of cholera had been registered in the war-torn country. On Tue 6 Jun 2017, the UN agency said at least 728 Yemenis had died from the epidemic. Several international organizations -- including the WHO, UNICEF and the Red Cross -- have recently stepped up the delivery of medical supplies to Yemen, where local health authorities have struggled to cope with the outbreak. Local officials say the ongoing fighting between Saudi-backed government forces and Houthi rebels has frustrated efforts to deal with the crisis. Impoverished Yemen has remained in a state of civil war since 2014, when the Houthis and their allies overran much of the country, including the capital Sana'a. In 2015, Saudi Arabia and its Arab allies launched a massive air campaign aimed at reversing Houthi military gains and shoring up Yemen's embattled government. [Byline: Mohammed al-Samei] -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail [The statistics of the impressive ongoing epidemic in Yemen in 2017 are: Date (2017) / Cases / Deaths 8 May / 1360 / 25 11 May / 2752 / 51 13 May / 8595 / 115 14 May / 11 000 / 180 17 May / 17 200 / 209 19 May / 23 500 / 242 21 May / 29 300 / 315 22 May / 35 217 / 361 24 May / 42 207 / 420 27 May / 51 832 / 471 30 May / 65 300 / 532 2 Jun / 73 700 / 605 4 Jun / 86 400 / 676 5 Jun / 91 400 / 728 6 Jun / 96 000 / 746 The outbreak continues essentially unabated; in the past 4 days, there have been about 22 300 new cases and 141 deaths. These numbers are, no doubt, a small amount of the total, since as few as 10-20 percent of _V. cholerae_ cases are overt. At that rate, the next 4 weeks could produce an overall total of almost 250 000 reported cases and more than 1700 deaths. Aggressive interventions to stem this substantial outbreak in Yemen including sources of clean water and a vaccination campaign are problematic because of the ongoing conflict in the country. An intervention with vaccine, if possible, could potentially stem the tide of the ongoing event. The following is extracted from Lutwick LI, Preis J, Choi P: Cholera. In: Chronic illness and disability: the pediatric gastrointestinal tract. Greydanus DE, Atay O, Merrick J (eds). NY: Nova Bioscience, 2017 (in press): \"For a variety of logistic, financial, and historical reasons, vaccines have not been available for cholera control programs outside of Viet Nam. Given as 2 or 3 dose courses, efficacy can be as high as 60-80 per cent for at least 2-3 years but much shorter protection lengths in children younger than 5 years of age. Cost-effectiveness, especially once an outbreak has occurred, had remained unproven until reports from Guinea (57) and Haiti (58) demonstrated utility. \"The current vaccines prequalified for use by WHO (59) are: - Dukoral (produced in Sweden) that contains several biotypes of O1 with recombinant cholera toxin B subunit, which also offers some protection against enterotoxigenic _E. coli_; - Shanchol (produced in India) that contains biotypes of both O1 and O139 without the recombinant B unit. In a large study in Kolkata, India, a cluster-randomized, double blind, placebo-controlled study of this product (60), the cumulative efficacy of the vaccine at 5 years was 65 per cent (95 per cent CI 52-74, p less than 0.0001). A locally-produced vaccine similar to this vaccine (mORCVAX) is produced in Viet Nam; - Euvichol (produced in South Korea) that, like Shanchol, contains both O1 and O139 without recombinant B subunit. This vaccine has been reported to be non-inferior to Shanchol in a Philippine study (61). In June 2016, the US FDA for the 1st time approved a cholera vaccine for use locally in travelers to cholera-endemic areas. This vaccine, Vaxchora, is an oral live, attenuated biologic (62) that is a reformulation of a previous product. This product, a single dose immunization also referred to as CVD 102-HgR, must be stored in the frozen state and as a live, attenuated bacterial vaccine is not given until at least 14 days after antibacterials were used and should be given at least 10 days before oral chloroquine antimalarial prophylaxis. Single dose use is an advantage over the older inactivated products which are given in 2 doses. Studies, however, have suggested that one dose of these inactivated oral vaccines can be effective when the vaccines are in short supply in both endemic and outbreak situations (63, 64). References ---------- 57. Luquero FJ, Grout L, Ciglenecki I, et al. Use of _Vibrio cholerae_ vaccine in an outbreak in Guinea. N Engl J Med. 2014; 370(22): 2111-2120; . 58. S\u00e9v\u00e8re K, Rouzier V, Anglade SB, et al. Effectiveness of oral cholera vaccine in Haiti: 37-month follow-up. Am J Trop Med Hyg. 2016; 94(5): 1136-1142;  . 59. Bhattacharya SK, Sur D, Ali M, et al. 5 year efficacy of a bivalent killed whole-cell oral cholera vaccine in Kolkata, India: a cluster-randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial. Lancet Inf Dis. 2013; 13(12): 1050-1056;  . 60. WHO. WHO prequalified vaccines.  . 61. Balk YO, Choi SK, Olveda RM, et al. A randomized, non-inferiority trial comparing two bivalent killed, whole cell, oral cholera vaccines (Euvichol vs Shanchol) in the Philippines. Vaccine 2015; 33(46): 6350-65; . 62. Freedman DO. Re-born in the USA: another cholera vaccine for travelers. Travel Med Infect Dis. 2016;14: 295-296. 63. Qadri F, Wierzba TF, Ali M, et al. Efficacy of a single dose, inactivated oral cholera vaccine in Bangladesh. N Engl J Med. 2016;374: 1723-1732. 64. Azman AS, Parker LA, Rumunu J, et al. Effectiveness of one dose of oral cholera vaccine in response to an outbreak: a case-cohort study. Lancet Global Health 2016;4: e856-e863.\"  - Mod.LL A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  .] [", "WHITE NOSE SYNDROME, BATS - NORTH AMERICA (07): (ALABAMA) SOUTHEASTERN BAT, FIRST REPORT **************************************************************************************** A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Thu 1 Jun 2017 Source: Satprnews [edited] Biologists have confirmed white-nose syndrome [WNS] in the southeastern bat, or _Myotis austroriparius_, for the 1st time. The species joins 8 other hibernating bat species in North America that are afflicted with the deadly bat fungal disease. The diseased bat was found in Shelby County, Alabama, at Lake Purdy Corkscrew Cave, by surveyors from the Alabama Department of Conservation and Natural Resources (ADCNR) Nongame Program; U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service-Alabama Ecological Services Field Office; Ecological Solutions, Inc.; and the Southeastern Cave Conservancy, Inc. The cave is owned by the Birmingham Water Works and managed by the Southeastern Cave Conservancy, Inc., a nonprofit organization dedicated to cave acquisition, conservation and management. WNS in the southeastern bat was confirmed in the laboratory by the U.S. Geological Survey. A fungus, _Pseudogymnoascus destructans_, or Pd, causes WNS, which affects many, but not all bat species that come into contact with it. Of those affected, bat populations have declined by more than 90 percent. \"We are disappointed to find white-nose syndrome in another species but hopeful that the southeastern bat may fare better than many of its more northern cousins based on how long it took to be diagnosed with the disease,\" said Jeremy Coleman, national WNS coordinator for the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service. \"This discovery, along with the continued spread of Pd this year [2017], reinforces the need for our continued vigilance in the face of white-nose syndrome.\" 1st detected in New York in 2007, WNS is now in 31 states and 5 Canadian provinces. Other species confirmed with WNS include little brown, northern long-eared, Indiana, Eastern small-footed, gray, tricolored, big brown and Yuma myotis. All the affected species eat insects and hibernate during the winter. The northern long-eared bat was designated as threatened under the federal Endangered Species Act in 2015, primarily due to the threat of WNS. Bats are an important part of our nation's ecosystems, and provide significant pest control services to American farmers. Insectivorous bats likely save the United States agricultural industry at least USD 3 billion each year, or approximately USD 74 per acre for the average farmer. Alabama is home to 15 species of bats, including northern long-eared bats and federally endangered gray and Indiana bats. Each winter, the Alabama Bat Working Group (ABWG) surveys areas to inventory bat populations, discover important bat hibernation areas and document the advance of WNS. This year [2017], biologists from the ABWG surveyed 50 sites in 14 counties and found that numbers of tricolored bats and endangered Indiana bats had substantially declined. Nick Sharp, a member of the ABWG and nongame biologist with the Alabama Division of Wildlife and Freshwater Fisheries, says the decline of tricolored bats has experts concerned. \"Tricolored bats were once common in Alabama but now seem to be disappearing due to WNS. We are troubled by the potential loss of the important ecosystem function this species provides in Alabama,\" he said. \"Ongoing surveillance for the _P. destructans_ fungus and white-nose syndrome provides critical information to resource managers about the occurrence of this disease in North American bats,\" said David Blehert, a scientist with the USGS National Wildlife Health Center. \"This information is essential to inform future response efforts.\" WNS was 1st documented in Alabama in 2012 in Jackson County and since has been confirmed in bats in Jackson, Lawrence, Limestone, Marshall, Morgan and, now, Shelby counties. In addition to finding the diseased southeastern bat this season, the ABWG swabbed more than 100 bats statewide, adding Blount, Bibb and Madison to the list of counties where WNS fungus has been documented. Calhoun, Colbert and Lauderdale tested Pd-positive in previous years. -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts [The southeastern Bat (_Myotis austroriparius_) is found along the Mississippi Valley from southern Illinois and Indiana south to Louisiana, eastern Texas, and southeastern Oklahoma; eastward across northern Florida and the Coastal Plain of Georgia and South Carolina. It is listed among the species of least conservation concern by IUCN because of its wide distribution, presumed large population, occurrence in a number of protected areas, and because it is unlikely to be declining at nearly the rate required to qualify for listing in a threatened category. The fact that it took about 5 years since the arrival of WNS in Alabama to find the disease in such a common bat species hints that southeastern bats are not particularly susceptible to Pd. For a picture of the southeastern bat go to  . - Mod.PMB A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  .] [", "ANTHRAX - BANGLADESH (03): (RAJSHAHI) BOVINE, MORE HUMAN CASES ************************************************************** A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Thu 8 Jun 2017 Source: The Daily Star [edited] 18 people have been infected with anthrax at Kaliakore village in Ulapara upazila of Sirajganj in the last 24 hours, according to upazila health complex officials. All the patients are being given treatment at the hospital, while a medical team has been kept alert in the village to identify more patients, said Dr Jafrul Hasan, Ullapara upazila health and family planning officer. MAR of the village slaughtered a diseased cow on Mon 29 May 2017 and distributed meat among the people, he said. People who came in touch with the meat fell sick, and all of them are infected with anthrax, said the doctor. Earlier, 25 people were infected with anthrax at Jantihar village of Faridpur upazila in Pabna 5 days ago. Of them, one died on 2 Jun 2017. The deceased was MA, 12, son of GM of Jantihar village. He took part when a diseased cow was slaughtered in the village last week, said family members. Anthrax outbreaks at Jantihar village in the upazila started after the slaughtering of 2 diseased cows on 27 May 2017, said locals. People engaged with the meat processing were infected with anthrax, said Livestock Officer Md Kamruzzaman. -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail [Sirajganj is to the immediate north of Pabna; see  . Clearly, the anthrax season has started in Rajshahi. Considering the repetitiveness of these events, a provincial anthrax control and surveillance programme is overdue and necessary on public health, social, and agricultural priorities. The Sterne anthrax vaccine is certainly one of the cheapest vaccines in the world and very effective. The benefit cost ratio for such a progamme would be very positive and cost effective, and would have widespread rural support and in the smaller market towns; contaminated meat routinely finds its way into street markets. The only way to prevent human anthrax in such non-industrial environments is to vaccinate the livestock, and especially cattle. Once a year in the spring is all you need to do. - Mod.MHJ A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  .] [", "EBOLA UPDATE (28): DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF CONGO, UGANDA, RESEARCH ***************************************************************** A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases In this update: [1] DR Congo update 27 May-2 Jun 2017 [2] DR Congo update 5 Jun 2017 [3] Uganda: suspected case [4] Uganda: not Ebola [5] Research ****** [1] DR Congo update 27 May-2 Jun 2017 Date: Week 22: 27 May-2 Jun 2017 Source: WHO Bulletin on outbreaks and other emergencies [edited] Ebola DRC: 7 cases, 4 deaths, 57 percent CFR -------------------------- WHO, UN Agencies, international organisations, non-governmental organisations (NGOs) and partners continue to support the Ministry of Health in the DRC to investigate and respond to the outbreak of EVD confined to Likati Health Zone, Bas Uele Province in the northeast of the country. Two cases have been confirmed as positive for EVD by serology this week [27 May-2 Jun 2017]. These 2 cases were previously reported as suspected cases and are part of known transmission chains. Their contacts have been followed up. The date of the last confirmed case reported remains as 11 May 2017. Since the beginning of the outbreak on 21 Apr 2017, 4 confirmed and 3 probable cases have been reported, of which 4 have died (case fatality rate, CFR: 57 percent). Enhanced surveillance activities are ongoing in affected communities, and new suspected cases continue to be reported and screened. Predictive modelling suggests there is a low and decreasing probability of further cases; however, it is critical to remain vigilant. Concurrently, differential diagnoses and laboratory investigations are ongoing into the causes of illness in persons who remain sick but have tested negative for EVD, and into the unusually high mortality in the local swine population in 8 villages in the Nambwa Health Area. -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail Rapporteur Mary Marshall [See URL of this WHO weekly update for maps, but most recent update is below in [2]. - Mod.LK] ****** [2] DR Congo update 5 Jun 2017 Date: Mon 5 Jun 2017 Source: WHO External Situation Report no. 21 [edited] Ebola - DR Congo: 8 cases, 4 deaths, 50% CFR ----------------------------------------- WHO, UN Agencies, international organizations, non-governmental organizations (NGOs), and partners continue to support the Ministry of Health (MoH) in the Democratic Republic of the Congo to rapidly investigate and respond to the outbreak of Ebola virus disease (EVD) in Likati Health Zone, Bas Uele Province in the northeast of the country. On 5 Jun 2017, one case has been retrospectively confirmed as positive for EVD by serology with a date of onset of 29 Apr 2017. This case was previously reported as a suspected case and is part of the known transmission chain. The contacts for this individual have already been followed up and graduated from the contact follow up period. The date of the last confirmed case reported remains as 11 May 2017. One new suspected case has been reported as of 5 Jun 2017 in the Ngayi health area, with 15 associated contacts being followed up daily; a sample has been taken to test for EVD. Therefore, there are currently a total of 5 confirmed, 3 probable and one suspected case. Of these, 4 survived, and 4 died, resulting in a case fatality rate of 50 percent. The confirmed and probable cases were reported from Nambwa (4 confirmed and 2 probable), Ngayi (1 probable) and Mabongo (1 confirmed). The outbreak remains confined to Likati Health Zone. Modelling suggests the risk of further cases is currently low but not negligible, and decreases with each day without new confirmed/probable cases. As of the reporting date, 76 percent of simulated scenarios predict no further cases in the next 30 days. All 7 response committees are maintaining functionality at the national level, namely monitoring, case management, water sanitation and hygiene (WASH) and biosafety, laboratory and research, pyscho-social management, logistics, and communication. The 1st response teams, who have been in the field since the start of the outbreak, [are] being replaced this week. A response team will remain in the affected areas until the declaration of the end of the outbreak. This EVD outbreak in the Democratic Republic of the Congo was notified to WHO by the MoH on 11 May 2017. The cluster of cases and deaths of previously unidentified illness had been reported since late April 2017. Likati Health Zone shares borders with 2 provinces in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and with the Central African Republic (Figure 1). The affected area is remote and hard to reach, with limited communication and transport infrastructure. -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail Rapporteur Mary Marshall [This situation may change due to updated confirmed numbers of cases and deaths, contacts being monitored, and the laboratory results are subject to change due to enhanced surveillance, contact tracing activities, ongoing laboratory investigations, reclassification, and case, contact, and laboratory data consolidation. Informative maps and figures are available at the URL above. It was thought the DRC Ebola outbreak was successfully contained as of 23 May 2017, the date of the latest suspected case. The last confirmed case had been 11 May 2017. The blog PATH ( ) attributes the rapid containment to an improved alert and response system, better mapping to get supplies and responders in place quickly and efficiently, and the use of a mobile laboratory and rapid diagnostic tests developed since the 2014 West Africa outbreak. Certainly, effective case management, effective infection prevention and control practices, surveillance and contact tracing, a good laboratory service, safe burials, and social mobilization also played a role, as considered by WHO. - Mod.LK] ****** [3] Uganda: suspected Ebola Date: Tue 6 Jun 2017 Source: Observer [edited] The patient who was recently admitted and isolated at Lacor hospital in Gulu district after profuse bleeding is suffering from a bleeding disorder, medical personnel have announced. Dr Cyprian Opira, the executive director of the hospital says preliminary tests conducted on the patient indicate that she is suffering from lack of blood clotting factors, a condition that occurs when blood cannot clot properly. The patient was isolated over the weekend after being transferred from Adjumani district with complaints of bleeding from her body openings. Dr Opira says the hospital had a very difficult time managing the bleeding after the patient rejected blood transfusion on religious grounds. The patient is a follower of Jehovah's Witnesses, a religious group that bars its members from undertaking blood transfusions, donating, or storing their own blood for transfusion. Jehovah's Witnesses' literature teaches that rejecting transfusions is an indisputable religious stand and that those who respect life as a gift from God do not try to sustain life by taking in blood, even in an emergency. To them, accepting transfusion is regarded as abandoning religious doctrines. However, Dr Opira says that the bleeding has now subsided as the hospital waits for Ebola test results on samples taken to Uganda Virus Research Institute in Entebbe. He called for calm, adding that health workers are well prepared to handle any emergency. The Ebola fear came barely a month after the World Health Organization confirmed an outbreak of Ebola in the Democratic Republic of Congo. According to the DRC health ministry, 3 people had died after testing positive to the virus in the remote Likati health district [According to WHO, there were 4 deaths; see bulletin above. - Mod.LK]. Ebola is a rare but deadly virus that causes bleeding inside and outside the body. It spreads through contact with the skin or bodily fluids of an infected animal or person. Medical experts say that the virus wrecks the immune system and damages almost every organ. To date, the disease has no cure. The last outbreak killed more than 11 000 when the virus swept through the West African states of Liberia, Guinea and Sierra Leone last year [2016]. It remains the most severe outbreak of Ebola since the discovery of Ebola viruses in 1976. Uganda has witnessed 5 Ebola outbreaks over the past 14 years, which have been quickly contained through a combination of epidemiological luck and a well-coordinated response system operating at several levels of the health service. The most devastating was the 1st Ebola outbreak in Gulu in 2000, which infected 425 people and killed 224. -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail Rapporteur Mary Marshall [According to : \"The patient came for medical check-up at the Gynaecology Ward on 31 May 2017. However, her condition wasn't good; she later began bleeding a lot from all body openings. The doctors detected high fever and haemorrhagic manifestations before she was rushed to an isolation ward,\" Dr Emmanuel Ochola, an epidemiologist at the hospital said... After the Gulu female patient was booked into isolation, doctors extracted samples, which they sent for analysis at the Uganda Virus Research Institute in Entebbe last Sat [3 Jun 2017]. The results are expected out today [7 Jun 2017]. Dr Felix Ochom, a WHO staff in the Emergency and Preparedness Unit at the Uganda office in Kampala, said yesterday [6 Jun 2017]: \"We are aware of the suspected case, but we are working with the Ministry of Health. The samples were delivered to Entebbe using the Hub system, and we are going to test them.\" \"We are monitoring the patient closely in isolation as we wait for the test results from UVRI; we are on high alert at the facility and have taken all the necessary precautions. We caution other health practitioners in various health facilities to be on high alert and refer suspicious cases of haemorrhagic fever immediately,\" Dr Ochola added. See just below for a report ruling out Ebola as the causative agent of this patient's symptoms. - Mod.LK] ****** [4] Uganda: not Ebola Date:7 Jun 2017 Source: Monitor [edited] The World Health Organization (WHO) and the Ministry of Health yesterday [6 Jun 2017] ruled out [Ebola virus disease (EVD)] after blood samples from the suspected patient tested negative at the Uganda Virus Research Institute (UVRI). \"The results for the sample from Lacor Hospital are negative for the viral haemorrhagic fevers: Ebola, Marburg, CCHF, RVF and Sosuga,\" said Mr Innocent Komakech, WHO's officer in charge of disease outbreaks. Mr Komakech added that WHO will keep in touch with Gulu district on preparedness and readiness to respond to such occurrences. Dr Paul Onek, Gulu district health officer, described the negative Ebola test results as \"good news\" but added a caution. \"While this is good news, both health workers and the population should be on the alert,\" he said. The blood samples from the patient were taken to UVRI in Entebbe last Saturday after the person at St Mary's Hospital Lacor developed symptoms similar to those of Ebola. The patient was placed in an isolation section as the hospital awaited results from the virus research institute. Dr Emmanuel Ochola, an epidemiologist at the hospital, said upon admission that the patient was diagnosed with severe sepsis, a life-threatening condition that leads to deranged blood coagulation that varies from mild alterations to severe disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC). \"Our 1st diagnosis was sepsis, but we needed to be very sure, because it had turned out severe. The patient was bleeding a lot, and we had to isolate her and take her blood sample to UVRI for confirmation whether it was haemorrhagic fever or not,\" Dr Ochola said. \"We are still keeping the patient in isolation, but generally speaking, she is fine now,\" Dr Ochola said. -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail ****** [5] Research 7 Jun 2017: Possible explanation for unparalleled spread of Ebola virus discovered [Citation. He J, Melnik LK. Komin A. (2017). Ebola Virus Delta Peptide is a Viroporin. J Virol, 2017; JVI.00438-17 DOI: 10.1128/JVI.00438-17] The world may be closer to knowing why Ebola spreads so easily thanks to a team of researchers from Tulane University and other leading institutions who discovered a new biological activity in a small protein from the deadly virus. The team's findings were recently published in the Journal of Virology. The discovery comes as health workers try to contain another Ebola outbreak in a remote area of the Democratic Republic of the Congo. Ebola, which is highly fatal, causes severe vomiting, internal bleeding and extreme gastrointestinal distress. A compound known as the \"delta peptide\" is produced in large amounts in Ebola virus-infected patients, but its function isn't yet known. The investigators tested the effects of purified delta peptide on cells from humans and other mammals and found that it could be a viroporin, a type of viral protein that damages host cells by making the membranes become permeable. \"Our leading hypothesis is that the delta peptide affects the gastrointestinal tract by damaging cells after its release from infected cells,\" says William Wimley, George A. Adrouny Professor of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology at Tulane University School of Medicine. \"This effect may be a major contributor to the severe GI illness of patients with the Ebola virus.\" During the West African Ebola that began in late 2013, the virus spread rapidly, principally because of the presence of the virus in GI fluids. The lack of effective countermeasures led to the deaths of more than 11 000 people. Tulane researchers say the immediate next step is to begin developing therapies that target the delta peptide. The research involved laboratories from Tulane University School of Medicine, which participated in the fight against Ebola virus on the front lines in Sierra Leone during the outbreak, as well as researchers from Johns Hopkins University and the Louisiana State University Health Sciences Center. [Compiled by: Celeste Whitlow ] -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail [A map of the affected areas can be seen at  and a HealthMap/ProMED-mail map of the DRC at  . - Mod.LK] [", "FALSIFIED POLYSACCHARIDE MENINGOCOCCAL ACWY VACCINE - WEST AFRICA, WHO, ALERT ***************************************************************************** A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Wed 31 May 2017 Source: WHO, Essential medicines and health products, Alerts [edited] Medical product alert no. 1/2017 -------------------------------- Falsified meningococcal ACWY vaccine circulating in West Africa This Medical Product Alert relates to the circulation of a confirmed falsified meningococcal ACWY vaccine discovered in Niger. This product is used to immunise against meningococcal disease serogroups A, C, W, and Y. Meningococcal meningitis vaccine is listed as a WHO Essential Medicine. On 31 May 2017, the manufacturer \"Bio-Manguinhos/Fiocruz\" informed WHO that a falsified version of the following product was available in Niger: Product name: Polysaccharide Meningococcal ACYW Vaccine Product batch number: 089UMH002 Z Expiry date: 092017 Date of manufacture: 092014 The label on the product claims that it is manufactured by Bio-Manguinhos/Fiocruz and is presented in vials of 10 doses each. Photographs of the falsified vaccine are available in annex [available at the source URL above]. This falsified product has not yet been subject to laboratory analysis. The manufacturer Bio-Manguinhos/Fiocruz has stated that: - they do not manufacture Polysaccharide Meningococcal ACWY Vaccine; - based on examination of the photographs they can confirm that this packaging is falsified. No adverse events following immunisation attributed to this falsified vaccine are known to have been reported at this stage. On the basis of the above information, any Meningococcal ACWY Vaccine claiming to be manufactured by \"Bio-Manguinhos/Fiocruz\", should be considered falsified and reported. Advice to health care professionals, patients, and national authorities ---------------------------------------------------------------------- If you are in possession of this vaccine, please do not use, contact a healthcare professional as soon as possible for advice, and report the incident to your local Ministry of Public Health/National Medicines Regulatory Authorities/National Pharmacovigilance Centre. Please seek immediate advice from a qualified healthcare professional if you have been immunised with this falsified vaccine, or if you suffer an adverse event following immunisation with this vaccine, and report the incident as indicated above. Members of the public who are aware of falsified medical products sold by various retailers should report to their national health authorities. It is necessary to ensure that all medical products are obtained from authentic and reliable sources. Their authenticity and origin should be carefully checked and verified with manufacturers before use. WHO requests increased vigilance for the supply chains of countries likely to be affected by these falsified products. Vigilance should include hospitals, clinics, pharmacies and any other suppliers of medical products. Authorities are asked to immediately notify WHO if these falsified products are discovered in their country. If you have any information on their supply and/or distribution please contact  . WHO will issue Medical Product Alerts to ensure a timely, proportionate, accurate, and consistent response to health events arising from substandard and falsified medical products, which represent a significant threat to international public health. Alerts will be published on the WHO website, and will remain on the website for a period of 5 years before archiving. Alerts may also be disseminated to the current known networks of National Medicines Regulatory Authorities dealing with defective medicines, International Health Regulation Focal Points, substandard and falsified surveillance and monitoring focal points, and National pharmacovigilance and vaccine networks. WHO Surveillance and Monitoring - Rapid Alert --------------------------------------------- Substandard, spurious, falsely labelled, falsified, and counterfeit (SSFFC) medical products. All WHO Drug Alerts are available at -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail [The distribution of substandard/counterfeit drugs, especially antibiotics and antimalarial agents is a growing problem worldwide, but is most often reported in less-developed countries ( ,  , and  ). Also see  . Use of a polysaccharide meningococcal ACWY vaccine that may contain no or substandard product in West Africa in the face of the current ongoing meningococcal meningitis outbreak is obviously a major problem. - Mod.ML A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  .] [", "FOOT & MOUTH DISEASE - ISRAEL (04): (HAIFA) BOVINE, OIE, SEROTYPE O ******************************************************************* A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Tue 6 Jun 2017 Source: OIE, WAHID (World Animal Health Information Database), weekly disease information 2017; 30(23) [edited] Foot-and-mouth disease [FMD], Israel ------------------------------------ Information received on 6 Jun 2017 from Dr Nadav Galon, Director, Veterinary Services and Animal Health, Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development, Bet Dagan, Israel Summary Report type: immediate notification Date of start of the event: 29 May 2017 Date of confirmation of the event: 5 Jun 2017 Reason for notification: reoccurrence of a listed disease Date of previous occurrence: March 2017 Manifestation of disease: clinical disease Causal agent: Foot and mouth disease virus Serotype: O Nature of diagnosis: clinical, laboratory (advanced) This event pertains a defined zone within the country. New outbreaks (1) Total outbreaks: 1 Outbreak 1 (FMDV 0): Ein Saala, Hadera, Haifa Date of start of the outbreak: 29 May 2017 Outbreaks status: continuing (or date resolved not provided) Epidemiological unit: village Total animals affected: Species / Susceptible / Cases / Deaths / Killed and disposed of / Slaughtered Cattle / 127/ 8 / 0 / 0 / 0 Affected population: free-ranging beef herd. Ulcers on the tongue. All the affected animals but one are pregnant heifers or 1st calf heifers. The herd was vaccinated 6 months ago. The only adult cow showing clinical signs is a cow that ran away last year and was not vaccinated (the owner claims). No mortality was noticed. Old lesions (healed and covered with new epithelium) and new lesions (ruptured vesicles, no epithelium flaps), can be seen in the herd. Outbreak statistics [rates apparent, expressed as percentages]: Species / morbidity rate / mortality rate / case fatality rate / proportion susceptible animals lost* Cattle / 6.30 / 0 / 0 / 0 *Removed from the susceptible population Epidemiology Source of the outbreak(s) or origin of infection: unknown or inconclusive Control measures Measures applied: movement control inside the country, vaccination in response to the outbreak(s), screening, quarantine, zoning, no treatment of affected animals; Measures to be applied: no other measures Diagnostic test results Laboratory name and type: Kimron Veterinary Institute [KVI], FMD laboratory (national laboratory) Species / Test / Test date / Result Cattle / real-time PCR / 21 Nov 2015 / positive Future reporting The event is continuing. Weekly follow-up reports will be submitted. [The location of this outbreak can be seen on the interactive map included in the OIE report at the source URL above.] -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail [In February 2017 Israel reported an outbreak of FMDV-O in the district of HaDarom (Southern). See further details of this February 2017 event at  . This event was reported as resolved on 7 Mar 2017. - Mod.CRD Ein Saala (Ayn-al-Sahla), where the current FMD outbreak reportedly started in late May 2017, affecting cattle, is situated just 1.2 km (0.75 mi) from the demarcation line between Israeli and Palestinian (West Bank) territories, where several FMDV outbreaks were reported earlier in May, affecting sheep and cattle (see http://promedmail.org/post/20170516.5039513; note that serotyping was pending). In the meantime, those earlier isolates have been serotyped O, and genotyped EA-3, similar to earlier outbreaks in the Gaza Strip (Palestinian Authority) and one Israeli dairy cattle farm adjacent to the Gaza Strip. This East-African strain is known to be widely spread in Egypt. Its spread from Egypt to the Gaza Strip, then eastwards to the West Bank, is notable. It will be interesting to obtain genotyping results of the current case in Ayn-al Sahla (map at  ). The initial genotyping of the virus strains in the Gaza Strip and southwest Israel, as FMDV 'O EA-3' was carried out by the Kimron Veterinary Institute at Beit-Dagan; this has later been confirmed by the WRL FMD (Pirbright), where the strains from the West Bank (Yatta) have been found to be of the same East-African/Egyptian genotype. FMDV serotype A of an Asian topotype has been recently identified in Israeli cattle on the Lebanese border, and a secondary outbreak of the same strain, recorded on the Golan Heights, has been reported to the OIE. Past experience in Israel showed that in most cases, serotype O strains were more likely to spread than serotype A strains, clinically affecting both large and small ruminants, while serotype A strains seemed more likely to affect cattle. - Mod.AS A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  .] [", "DRUG ABUSE - USA: (GEORGIA) POTENTIALLY LETHAL UNKNOWN SUBSTANCE, REQUEST FOR INFORMATION ***************************************************************************************** A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Tue 6 Jun 2017 Source: Georgia Department of Public Health [edited] The Georgia Department of Public Health (DPH) has become aware of a dangerous, potentially lethal substance contained in street drugs surfacing in central and South Georgia. Dozens of patients have been hospitalized and there are reports of deaths that may be associated with the drugs, but confirmation is pending. The overdoses have been reported over a 48-hour period in Centerville, Perry, Macon-Warner Robins, and Albany, but the drugs may also be sold on the street in other areas of the state. Patients reportedly purchased yellow pills alleged to be Percocet, an opioid pain medication. The substance has not yet been identified but it is extremely potent and has required massive doses of naloxone (Narcan) to counteract its effects. Testing is being done to identify the pills and the ingredients. 1st responders say patients are unconscious or unresponsive and have difficulty breathing or have stopped breathing. Many patients need to be placed on ventilators. Call 9-1-1 immediately if you have taken the pills or if you think someone has used the drug. Opioid overdose is a very dangerous condition that can result in permanent physical and mental damage or even death if medical treatment is not administered right away. DPH is working closely with the Georgia Bureau of Investigation, Georgia Poison Center and the Georgia Drugs and Narcotics Agency and federal partners on this investigation. -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail [Purchasing or acquiring drugs from street dealers, even those you think you know, can be a dangerous situation. The drugs may be counterfeits, or mixed with some other substance in an effort to extend the drug, all of which may have unwanted effects, including death. Results of the testing would be welcome. - Mod.TG] [As the report suggests that \"massive doses\" of nalaxone does work in reversing the effects of this substance, it suggests that the substance may be an opioid class drug with high receptor site uptake. An excellent review article on the use of nalaxone in management of opioid ingestion can be found at: Clarke SF, Dargan PI, Jones AL. Naloxone in opioid poisoning: walking the tightrope. Emerg Med J. 2005 Sep;22(9):612-6, available at: . - Mod.MPP] [The state of Georgia can be located on the HealthMap/ProMED-mail interactive map at . A county map can be seen at . - Sr.Tech.Ed.MJ] [", "SALMONELLOSIS - AUSTRALIA (03): (WESTERN AUSTRALIA) EGGS ******************************************************** A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Wed 7 Jun 2017 6:40 PM AWST Source: The West Australian [edited] West Australians [WA] are being warned to avoid eating raw or partly cooked eggs because of a surge in cases of salmonellosis. Reports of salmonella gastroenteritis are at records levels and have been linked to particular molecular types associated with eggs. The WA Health Department said yesterday, 6 Jun 2017, there had been 713 reported infections from _Salmonella [enterica_ serotype] Typhimurium by the end of April 2017, which was more than 4 times the usual number. The infection was commonly associated with consumption of foods containing raw or under-cooked eggs. A number of egg brands had been implicated. A spokeswoman said cases of salmonellosis had been increasing in WA since 2015 but had accelerated since late 2016. \"There are 2 molecular subtypes, PFGE1 and PFGE43, that are currently causing most of this increase,\" she said. \"Epidemiological evidence from investigations of identified localised outbreaks and a large case-control study of community cases indicates that eating raw or runny eggs is a significant cause of illness. This includes breakfast dishes containing eggs, and desserts and aioli made with raw eggs.\" Environmental investigations indicated some outbreaks had been caused by poor handling of egg products at the food manufacturing and preparation level and by consumers. The department said that while eggs were a good source of vitamins and minerals, like many other foods they could be contaminated with bacteria, including salmonellae. It was important to handle and prepare eggs safely to reduce the food poisoning risk. \"The department recommends that people don't use cracked or dirty eggs in raw egg dishes,\" she said. \"If possible, it is best to avoid any uncooked foods or dishes that contain raw egg. \"This is because it is impossible to guarantee the safety of eating raw eggs and dishes that contain unpasteurized raw egg products.\" People were advised to prepare egg dishes as close as possible to the time of eating them and refrigerate them at or below 5 deg C [41 deg F]. It was important to wash and dry hands thoroughly after handling eggs. [Byline: Cathy O'Leary] -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail [Salmonellosis is often thought to be associated with cracked eggs or eggs dirty with fecal matter, a problem controlled by cleaning procedures implemented in the egg industry. It is clearly the case, however, that most of the salmonellosis outbreaks linked to eggs were associated with uncracked, disinfected grade A eggs, or foods containing such eggs. The undamaged eggs become contaminated during ovulation, and thus were contaminated with the bacteria before the egg shell was formed. To avoid this, uncooked eggs should only be used as an ingredient, if pasteurized. - Mod.LL A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  .] [", "RUBELLA - TAIWAN: ex PHILIPPINES ******************************** A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Wed 7 Jun 2017 4:58 pm TWN Source: The China Post [edited] Health authorities have confirmed this year's [2017] 1st case of German measles [rubella] in Taiwan. According to the Centers for Disease Control (CDC), a 34-year-old man from Northern Taiwan complained of headaches, coughing, and rashes after returning from a language course from the Philippines on [4 Jun 2017]. Doctors later diagnosed the man with German measles. Authorities are now contacting over 60 people that the man may have come into contact with, including friends, family members, and passengers aboard the Eva Air flight (BR-272) he took to return to Taiwan. Currently none of those contacted have developed symptoms of the virus. CDC officials say that the man traveled to the Philippines on 11 Mar [2017] and started to experience coughing on 27 May [2017], while experiencing headaches and rashes 2 days later. Local doctors diagnosed the man with measles. The man boarded the flight bound for Taiwan believing he was no longer ill, but chose to wear a surgical mask as a precaution. Health authorities say that because the [German] measles' infection period (22 May-5 Jun 2017) had almost run its course and that the man had worn a surgical mask, the possibility of further infection in Taiwan was remote. The CDC will continue monitoring the man's health conditions until [25 Jun 2017]. The CDC said that over 95 percent of Taiwanese citizens are immune to German measles through previous infection or vaccinations, and that most physical reactions to the virus are mild. But the measles are a threat to unborn babies when they are contracted by the mother. Possible side effects in fetuses include deafness, glaucoma, cataracts, other congenital defects, stillbirths, and spontaneous abortion. Authorities issued a reminder that women of childbearing age should be vaccinated against the [German] measles. Local clinics offer vaccines free of charge for German measles, measles and mumps. -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts [Rubella (German measles) is a contagious disease caused by a virus [family Togaviridae, genus _Rubivirus_]. Most people who get rubella usually have a mild illness, with symptoms that can include a low-grade fever, sore throat, and a rash that starts on the face and spreads to the rest of the body. Rubella can cause a miscarriage or serious birth defects in an developing baby if a woman is infected while she is pregnant. The best protection against rubella is MMR (measles-mumps-rubella) vaccine. The virus continues to circulate widely, especially in Africa, the Eastern Mediterranean, and Southeast Asian regions. Last year (2016), a cumulative total of 4 rubella cases were confirmed in Taiwan, including 1 indigenous case and 3 imported cases from India, Hong Kong and China. (Excerpted from which contains a good map of Taiwan.) - Mod.LK A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  .] [", "FOODBORNE ILLNESS - JAPAN (03): (IBARAKI) SCHOOL STUDENTS, MILK, REQUEST FOR INFORMATION **************************************************************************************** A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Wed 7 Jun 2017 03:12 pm JST Source: Japan Today [edited] Ibaraki prefectural health officials said [Tue 6 Jun 2017] that 379 elementary and junior high school students fell ill on [Mon 5 Jun 2017] after drinking milk provided in their daily school lunches. According to the officials, around 3700 students at 61 schools in the prefecture complained of a \"disinfectant odor\" after consuming the milk supplied in their school lunches, Fuji TV reported. The prefecture's board of education said that of the 379 students who complained of not feeling well, 2 were taken to hospital after vomiting. Health officials said the milk came from Ibaraku Co in Mito. They are investigating the company's plant to try and determine the cause of the bad milk. -- Communicated by: Karyn Bischoff [Drinking milk which smells of disinfectant must have been nauseating. The article does not tell us how strong the odor was or if it was also distasteful. We are not told if this milk was drunk from a carton, bottle, or some type of glass supplied by the school. It could have been a disinfectant in a bottle, or perhaps carry over from a tank sterilization at the processing plant. But then the question arises as to why there was a failure of the quality control process at the plant, or at the schools' dishwashing facilities. Hopefully the children will recover and the investigation will turn up the truth of these circumstances.- Mod.TG] [More information on this event would be greatly appreciated - was a contaminant identified? if yes, what type of contaminant? known toxicity of the contaminant? and an epidemiologic investigation into the demographics of the cases, location of the event (were the children all together in the same lunchroom at the same time?), etc. The mention that the students \"felt ill\" but only 2 were reported to have vomited raises the possibility that this may have been an outbreak of hysteria triggered by either a bad smell or witnessing 2 children vomiting. Ibaraki is located to the north of Tokyo Japan. Ibaraki Prefecture is the northeastern part of the Kant\u014d region, stretching between Tochigi Prefecture and the Pacific Ocean and bounded on the north and south by Fukushima Prefecture and Chiba Prefecture. It also has a border on the southwest with Saitama Prefecture ( ). - Mod.MPP] [Maps of Japan can be seen at  and  . - Sr.Tech.Ed.MJ] [", "STRIPE RUST, WHEAT - CANADA, USA ******************************** A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases In this posting: [1] Canada (Ontario) [2] USA ****** [1] Canada (Ontario) Date: Thu 1 Jun 2017 9:45:59 EDT AM Source: St. Thomas Times-Journal [edited] Wheat stripe rust has become more prevalent [and] is spreading through Southwestern Ontario, aided by the mild winter. [It] has made its way up from the US. \"We were looking at 30 to 40 per cent or more yield loss,\" said Albert Tenuta, Ontario Ministry of Agriculture, Food and Rural Affairs. It's traditionally been confined to the Pacific Northwest, he said. \"There has been a shift with the stripe rust into most areas of North America.\" Ontario and the central US have had milder winters than normal, increasing the amount of stripe rust that overwintered. Stripe rust is so ubiquitous now that growers are struggling to keep up with the spread of the fungus. There are varieties of wheat that are resistant to stripe rust. But, he said, part of the problem is that new strains are able to bypass the resistant wheat types. In the last 2 years [2015/16], stripe rust has come in earlier than normal, a farmer said. \"We always get stripe rust in Ontario but it (usually) comes in after the wheat is already harvested.\" If the fungus starts to come in earlier in the life stage of the wheat it can have a devastating effect. \"Last year [2016] there were guys that lost half their yields,\" he said. [Byline: Laura Broadley] -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail ****** [2] USA Date: Mon 5 Jun 2017 Source: KLCC, National Public Radio (NPR) Oregon [edited] The dusty orange fungus called stripe rust cuts wheat yields in half. Especially this year [2017] when there's been an abundance of snow, rain, and cool weather. Farmers are battling the fungus from Louisiana and Texas all the way to Canada. If left untreated, highly-susceptible varieties can lose 60 per cent of their yields. In the Northwest, stripe rust is at epidemic levels. Xianming Chen, US Department of Agriculture, said stripe rust spores can travel for hundreds of miles on the wind. So infected fields can impact other fields from a long ways away. Farmers are having to make a difficult choice right now: do they spray again, or not spray? That's a significant cost for farmers faced with moderate prices for their wheat. To battle stripe rust experts like Chen are developing new, stronger varieties of wheat that have better tolerance of stripe rust. They are also working with major chemical companies to come up with new, more-effective fungicide treatments and they are working on the genetics of wheat plants to help find the resistant genes in stronger wheat. Chen also works up a model each year to predict how bad stripe rust will become to help farmers make decisions. [Byline: Anna King] -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail [Stripe rust (also called yellow rust) of cereals is caused by the fungus _Puccinia striiformis_ (previously var. _striiformis_ or _tritici_). The disease affects wheat (_Triticum aestivum_), durum wheat (_T. turgidum_), some barley varieties, triticale (wheat/rye hybrid) and a number of wild grasses. It causes yellow leaf stripes, loss of plant vigour, and stunting of plants with yield losses of 40 to 100 per cent in wheat. Spores are wind dispersed in several cycles during the cropping season. Grasses and volunteer crop plants may generate a \"green bridge\", providing inoculum for the next crop cycle. Disease monitoring is important so that timely action can be taken to limit the spread of the pathogen as well as build-up of inoculum. Disease management may include the use of resistant varieties, fungicide applications and control of pathogen reservoirs. Monitoring and resistance breeding programmes have been established in different regions for early detection of new rust strains and to attempt to stay ahead of pathogen evolution. While stem rust (_Puccinia graminis_ f. sp. _tritici_) poses a huge potential threat to world wheat production, stripe rust is currently causing the most damage to wheat crops on a global scale. New strains of both rusts with increased virulence and additional fungicide resistances have been reported in recent years from wheat-growing areas worldwide. Projects for double resistance breeding to manage both stripe and stem rusts simultaneously are in progress (see ProMED-mail post http://promedmail.org/post/20120831.1274190). New strains emerging in North America (for example, ProMED-mail post http://promedmail.org/post/20160610.4277039) may be responsible for stripe rust spread to Canada. In addition, climate warming allowing survival of wheat rusts on green bridges into higher latitudes is another example of pathogens extending their range due to climate change (see also ProMED-mail posts http://promedmail.org/post/20141024.2895414, http://promedmail.org/post/20120809.1235745, http://promedmail.org/post/20090914.3230, http://promedmail.org/post/20110718.2172). Maps North America:  ,  (with Canada & USA states), and Pictures Stripe rust symptoms on wheat:  ,  , and Stripe rust on barley:  and Ryegrass with stripe rust: and Links Additional news stories: (stripe rust, Nebraska) and (stripe & leaf rust alert, UK) Information on wheat stripe rust:  ,  ,  , and via _P. striiformis_ life cycle: _P. striiformis_ taxonomy and synonyms: and Global Rust Initiative: - Mod.DHA] [", "CHOLERA, DIARRHEA AND DYSENTERY UPDATE (49): ASIA (YEMEN) ********************************************************* A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Thu 8 Jun 2017 1:32:52 PM Source: i24 News [edited] Cases of cholera in war-ravaged Yemen have soared past 100 000 in recent days, the WHO announced on [Thu 8 Jun 2017], as aid agencies warn that hundreds are being struck down every day by the easily preventable disease. \"To date, 101 820 suspected cholera cases and 789 deaths have been reported in 19 governorates,\" a WHO spokesman told the Reuters news agency. Yemen faces a perilous humanitarian situation as a civil war between Houthi insurgents and the Saudi-backed former government rages on. Al Qaeda and Islamic State have also carried out attacks in the impoverished and largely arid country bordering Saudi Arabia and Oman. In 2015 a Saudi-led coalition began launching regular air strikes against Houthi targets, during which scores of civilians were also killed, and key infrastructure in ruins. The Director-General of the WHO, Margaret Chan, has urged international donors to stump up funds to fight the advance of preventable diseases. \"Nearly 19 million people in Yemen are in desperate need of assistance,\" she told a conference of potential donors in April 2017. \"Large swaths of the population are on the brink of famine. Between famine and death from starvation lies disease. Infections that a well-nourished body wards off become deadly in severely malnourished people, especially children and pregnant women.\" Aid agency Oxfam recently called for Western and Arab states to ramp up pressure the warring sides to allow health and aid workers to access communities in need. \"Yemen is on the edge of an abyss. Lives hang in the balance,\" said Oxfam Yemen director Sajjad Mohammed Sajid. \"2 years of war have plunged the country into one of the world's worst humanitarian crises and at the risk of famine. Now it is at the mercy of a deadly and rapidly spreading cholera epidemic. Cholera is simple to treat and prevent but while the fighting continues the task is made doubly difficult.\" Cholera, almost non-existent in the West, is easily treatable by keeping up food consumption and simple rehydration solutions, both of which are problematic as the country grapples with widespread food shortages and lack of access to health facilities. -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail [The statistics of the impressive ongoing epidemic in Yemen in 2017 are: Date (2017) / Cases / Deaths 8 May / 1360 / 25 11 May / 2752 / 51 13 May / 8595 / 115 14 May / 11 000 / 180 17 May / 17 200 / 209 19 May / 23 500 / 242 21 May / 29 300 / 315 22 May / 35 217 / 361 24 May / 42 207 / 420 27 May / 51 832 / 471 30 May / 65 300 / 532 2 Jun / 73 700 / 605 4 Jun / 86 400 / 676 5 Jun / 91 400 / 728 6 Jun / 96 000 / 746 7 Jun / 101 820 / 789 - Mod.LL A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  .] [", "ROCKY MOUNTAIN SPOTTED FEVER - USA (02): (INDIANA) FATAL ******************************************************** A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Wed 7 Jun 2017, 2:29 PM Source: NBC Chicago [edited] A tick bite may have led to the death of a young Indiana girl who fell dangerously ill in a matter of days last week [week 29 May to 4 Jun 2017], family members said. WTHR reports that a 2-year-old, of Plainfield, died [Sun 4 Jun 2017], after her family suspected she was infected with Rocky Mountain Spotted fever [RMSF] following a tick bite during a camping trip. Family members said it took only 1 week for the girl's health to deteriorate. \"Within less than like 5 days,\" a family friend said, who was asked to speak on the grieving family's behalf, told WTHR. \"Her little body couldn't handle it.\" First, the girl tested positive for strep throat. But the young girl's fever continued to climb to nearly 104 degrees. \"They just couldn't break it,\" the family friend told the news outlet. The child died at Riley Hospital for Children in Indianapolis [Sun 4 Jun 2017]. The family had said physicians suspected K was suffering from Rocky Mountain Spotted Fever, but confirmation from testing could take up to 2 weeks to complete. The CDC reports Rocky Mountain Spotted Fever can be fatal if not treated in the first few days of symptoms. Symptoms include fever, headache, abdominal pain, vomiting and muscle pain. In many cases, a rash may also develop, but that can take days to appear, if at all, health officials said. \"The progression of the disease varies greatly,\" according to the CDC's website. \"Patients who are treated early may recover quickly on outpatient medication, while those who experience a more severe course may require intravenous antibiotics, prolonged hospitalization or intensive care.\" Health officials note that in children, symptoms including a cough, sore throat and diarrhea may be seen, which \"can lead to misdiagnosis.\" The death comes amid numerous alerts from health departments across the Midwest warning of tickborne illnesses, particularly as warm weather approaches. The Illinois Department of Public Health warned residents [Wed 7 Jun 2017] about a rise in ticks across the area. \"A bite from a tick can cause anywhere from mild to severe illness, and even death in some cases, so it is important to protect yourself against bites,\" Director Nirav D. Shah said in a statement. The DuPage County Health Department sent out a similar alert. -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail [When the female tick harboring the organism attaches to a passing human, she usually starts low on the body after transferring from grassy vegetation or even directly or indirectly from a dog. After crawling around on clothes seeking an appropriate cutaneous site (wearing white clothes makes a wandering tick easier to spot), she attaches and begins to feed. If not already partially fed, after attaching, it generally takes 24 hours to activate and transmit the rickettsial organism. For this reason, daily or twice-daily tick checks with removal will minimize disease transmission. Ticks that attach in hairy areas such as the scalp or beard may be more difficult to find. The incubation period of the disease is about a week after the tick exposure, long after the tick has detached. The presenting illness is generally nonspecific, fever, muscle pains, headache (but the headache is usually described as quite severe). The rash begins on day 3 of the illness, initially maculopapular at the wrists and ankles before becoming petechial and purpuric, involving the palms and soles as well as spreading proximally to the trunk. Purpura usually is not seen before the 6th day of illness. The mortality is indeed quite low if treatment (usually a tetracycline) is begun during the 1st 2 days of the rash or before. Empiric treatment for this infection should always be begun in people with compatible symptoms inhabiting endemic areas during the spring and summer, even if no tick bite is known. The early rash of this disease can be seen at  . Delayed diagnosis contributes to morbidity and mortality of RMSF. The tetracyclines represent the best drug for treatment, even in children, and the following is the CDC statement in this regard  : Background on doxycycline and older tetracycline antimicrobials --------------------------------------------------------------- Tetracyclines are broad-spectrum antimicrobials in use since the 1940s. Older tetracycline-class drugs have been linked to cosmetic staining of permanent teeth when used in children before the age of 8 years. As a result, in 1970 a warning label was attached to all tetracycline-class antibiotics advising against the use in children under the age of 8 years. In 1967 doxycycline was introduced as a newer tetracycline-class antibiotic. Doxycycline binds less readily to calcium and has not been shown to cause the same tooth staining. Several studies have previously been published showing the lack of staining of permanent teeth when doxycycline was used in children. The warning, currently present on all tetracycline-class antibiotics, including doxycycline, continues to mention the concern regarding dental staining. Doxycycline and rickettsial diseases ------------------------------------ Doxycycline is the most effective treatment of all rickettsial diseases including RMSF, ehrlichiosis and anaplasmosis. It is the antimicrobial recommended by the American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP) and CDC for the treatment of suspected rickettsial diseases in patients of all ages. Studies have shown that other antimicrobials are less effective and are associated with a higher number of deaths (case fatality rate). In a 2012 national survey, 80 per cent of clinicians correctly selected doxycycline as the treatment of choice for suspected RMSF in persons 8 years or older, however, only 35 per cent of clinicians correctly chose doxycycline as the treatment of choice for suspected RMSF in children under 8 years. This hesitation may contribute to the increased fatality rate among children. Children under the age of 10 years represent less than 6 per cent of RMSF cases, but they represent 22 per cent of deaths. The same disproportionate case fatality rate in children has been observed for ehrlichiosis and other serious rickettsial infections. Doxycycline is most effective when given within the first 5 days of illness. Because there is no rapid test to diagnose rickettsial diseases, clinicians must diagnose and treat based on clinical suspicion alone. It is important that concern about dental staining [should] not cause providers to use other antibiotics, or delay the start of treatment in children. The newest evidence ------------------- In 2013, researchers from CDC and the Indian Health Service [IHS] began looking into the issue of dental staining following doxycycline usage, to better understand if this is an issue. This study was performed to look at whether or not doxycycline, in the dose and duration used to treat suspected RMSF, caused dental staining in children less than 8 years. The study took place in a community which has suffered from high rates of RMSF since 2003, where a large number of people, including children, were treated with doxycycline. Dentists inspected the permanent teeth of children who had received doxycycline for suspected RMSF prior to their 8th birthday and those who had not. Blinded dentists (without knowing which children had received the drug) looked for tooth staining, evaluated tooth color, and looked for evidence of weakness in the tooth enamel for all children in the study. No differences were found between children who had received doxycycline and those who had not. This study provides the largest sample size and best evidence to date that short courses of doxycycline (such as those used to treat rickettsial diseases) do not cause dental staining when given to children under the age of 8 years. The current label allows for the use of doxycycline in pediatric rickettsial patients because other antimicrobials are not likely to be effective for treatment. However, clearer language on the drug label may help avoid hesitation in prescribing life-saving doxycycline to children, and reinforce CDC and AAP RMSF treatment recommendations. Despite the current label warning, it is important for healthcare providers to know that doxycycline has not been shown to cause tooth staining in the dose and duration used to treat rickettsial diseases. Early administration of doxycycline in adults and children can prevent severe illness and save lives. - Mod.LL A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  .] [", "PESTE DES PETITS RUMINANTS - ISRAEL (02): (HADAROM) OVINE, OIE ************************************************************** A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: 7 Jun 2017 Source: OIE, WAHID (World Animal Health Information Database), weekly disease information 2017; 30(23) [edited] Peste des petits ruminants, Israel ---------------------------------- Information received on [and dated] 7 Jun 2017 from Dr Nadav Galon, director, Veterinary Services and Animal Health, Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development, Bet Dagan, Israel Summary Report type: Immediate notification Date of start of the event: 3 Jun 2017 Date of confirmation of the event: 5 Jun 2017 Reason for notification: recurrence of a listed disease Date of previous occurrence: 17 Jan 2017 Manifestation of disease: clinical disease Causal agent: Peste des petits ruminants virus Nature of diagnosis: clinical, laboratory (advance) This event pertains to a defined zone within the country New outbreaks (1) Summary of outbreaks: Total outbreaks: 1 Outbreak 1 (Segev-Shalom): Segev-Shalon, Beer-Sheva, Hadarom Date of start of the outbreak: 3 Jun 2017 Outbreak status: continuing (or date resolved not provided) Epidemiological unit: farm Total animals affected: Species / Susceptible / Cases / Deaths / Killed and disposed of / Slaughtered Sheep / 150 / 13 / 3 / 0 / 0 Affected population: Non vaccinated flock. The morbidity is seen in the lamb group (50 lambs aged 3-4 months). Clinical symptoms included cough, inflammation and ulcers in the mouth and bloody diarrhea. The flock has been vaccinated immediately after the diagnosis of the disease. Outbreak statistics [rates apparent, expressed as percentages] Species / Morbidity rate / Mortality rate / Case fatality rate / Proportion susceptible animals lost* Sheep/ 8.67 / 2 / 23.08 / 2 *Removed from the susceptible population through death, destruction and/or slaughter Epidemiology Source of the outbreak(s) or origin of infection: unknown or inconclusive Control measures Measures applied: movement control inside the country, vaccination in response to the outbreak(s), quarantine, no treatment of affected animals. Measures to be applied: No other measures Diagnostic test results: Laboratory name and type: Kimron Veterinary Institute, Virology Department (national laboratory) Species / Test / Test date / Result Sheep / real-time PCR / 5 Jun 2017 / Positive Future reporting The event is continuing. Weekly follow-up reports will be submitted. The location of the outbreak can be seen on the interactive map included in the OIE report at the source URL above. -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail [Peste des petits ruminants (PPR), is an acute contagious disease caused by a _Morbillivirus_ in the family _Paramyxoviridae_. It affects mainly sheep and goats and occasionally wild small ruminants. Based on the fact that PPR has been reported on a few occasions in camels, cattle and buffaloes, those animal species are considered to be susceptible although their potential role in the circulation of PPR virus (PPRV) has not been formally established. PPR occurs in Africa except Southern Africa, in the Arabian Peninsula, throughout most of the Near East and Middle East, and in Central and South-East Asia. The following comment by Mod.AS, published in posting http://promedmail.org/post/20170111.4757542, is applicable here: \"PPR appeared 1st in northern Israel in January 1993 (notification in OIE's Bulletin of 29 January 1993, Vol. 6 - No. 3). The route of introduction (most likely, from Lebanon) has not been established. Since then, the disease has become endemic and controlled mainly by mass vaccinations. \"On [1 Jul 2016], Israel's State veterinary Services & Animal Health (VSAH) published the discontinuation of compulsory, State organized PPR vaccinations, declaring further vaccinations as privatized and voluntary\". - Mod.CRD A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  .] [", "MERS-COV (35): SAUDI ARABIA (RIYADH), NOSOCOMIAL AND HOUSEHOLD TRANSMISSION *************************************************************************** A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Thu 8 Jun 2017 Source: Saudi MOH 7-8 Jun 2017 [edited] As of 14:00 [2:00 PM] today [Thu 8 Jun 2017], there have been a total of: 1642 laboratory-confirmed cases of MERS-CoV infection, including 668 deaths [reported case fatality rate 40.7 per cent], 942 recoveries, and 32 currently active cases/infections. [Please note that the prior post dated 6 Jun 2017 (MERS-CoV (34): Saudi Arabia, UAE, Qatar, WHO http://promedmail.org/post/20170606.5087888) erroneously had 19 currently active cases/infections when it should have been 22. My apologies for missing that error in the preparation and editing of the post. - Mod.MPP] [As previously mentioned, the numbers of deaths, recoveries and currently active cases come from my spreadsheet tallies and differ from those listed on the Saudi MOH website; my spreadsheet counts asymptomatic infections. - Mod.MPP] Since the last ProMED-mail update [6 Jun 2017], there have been a total of: 10 newly confirmed cases/infections [8 asymptomatic contacts] 0 newly reported fatalities, and 0 newly reported recoveries. Information on newly confirmed cases (10 cases/infections - All from Riaydh [Riyadh Region]) Date: 8 Jun 2017 (5 cases - 4 asymptomatic) 1 - A 30-year-old expat female, healthcare worker currently in stable condition having been identified as an asymptomatic contact of a confirmed MERS-CoV infected individual. Classified as a secondary healthcare acquired case in a healthcare worker. 2 - A 31-year-old expat female, healthcare worker currently in stable condition having been identified as an asymptomatic contact of a confirmed MERS-CoV infected individual. Classified as a secondary healthcare acquired case in a healthcare worker. 3 - A 25-year-old Saudi male, healthcare worker currently in stable condition. Classified as a secondary healthcare acquired case in a healthcare worker. 4- A 58-year-old expat male, non-healthcare worker currently in stable condition having been identified as an asymptomatic contact of a confirmed MERS-CoV infected individual. Classified as a secondary hospital acquired case in a patient. 5- A 48-year-old expat male, non-healthcare worker currently in stable condition having been identified as an asymptomatic contact of a confirmed MERS-CoV infected individual. Classified as a secondary hospital acquired case in a patient. Date: 7 Jun 2017 (5 cases/infections) 6- A 35-year-old Saudi female, non-healthcare worker currently in stable condition having been identified as an asymptomatic contact of a confirmed MERS-CoV infected individual. Classified as a secondary case in a household contact. 7 - A 42-year-old expat female, healthcare worker currently in stable condition. Classified as a secondary healthcare acquired case in a healthcare worker. 8 - A 45-year-old expat female, healthcare worker currently in stable condition having been identified as an asymptomatic contact of a confirmed MERS-CoV infected individual. Classified as a secondary healthcare acquired case in a healthcare worker. 9- A 57-year-old Saudi female, non-healthcare worker currently in stable condition having been identified as an asymptomatic contact of a confirmed MERS-CoV infected individual. Classified as a secondary hospital acquired case in a patient. 10 - A 39-year-old expat male, healthcare worker currently in stable condition having been identified as an asymptomatic contact of a confirmed MERS-CoV infected individual. Classified as a secondary healthcare acquired case in a healthcare worker. -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail [In the past 2 days since the last ProMED-mail update on [6 Jun 2017], there has been an additional 10 cases/infections identified in Riyadh associated with either household (1 individual) or healthcare (9 individuals - 6 healthcare workers and 3 patients) contact. A total of 8 of these 10 individuals were listed as asymptomatic, most likely identified through know or potential contact tracing activities. The other 2 were symptomatic (cases 3 and 7) and currently listed as in stable condition. Re-assessing reports of laboratory confirmed cases/infections in Riyadh, there were 2 fatal cases, 1 each reported on [6 May and 14 May 2017], followed by 30 additional reports during the period [15 May] through today [8 Jun 2017]. Of note, in the [6 Jun 2017] WHO update (posted in the ProMED-mail update of 6 Jun 2017); the case reported on [14 May 2017] was identified as the index case in the ongoing outbreak. Of these 30 additional laboratory confirmations, 15 involve healthcare workers, 9 involve patients, 2 are household contacts, 3 are still under investigation and 1 case (a fatal case) was listed as a primary case with direct contact with camels. So what is going on in Riyadh? How many healthcare facilities are implicated in this current outbreak (presumably an independent outbreak from the one reported in Wadi Aldawasir back in April 2017 (see prior ProMED-mail posts)? Has there been a change in laboratory techniques for testing of asymptomatic contacts? Has the \"net\" been widened with more individuals being identified for contact testing than previously? Or, has the virus changed with increased transmissibility for secondary (and possibly tertiary or more) transmission chains involving asymptomatic individuals? More information from knowledgeable individuals would be greatly appreciated. The HealthMap/ProMED map of Saudi Arabia can be found at:  . - Mod.MPP] [", "CRIMEAN-CONGO HEMORRHAGIC FEVER - IRAN (02): UPDATE *************************************************** A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Mon 5 Jun 2017 11:48 Source: Apa News [edited] A total of 31 people have been diagnosed with Crimean-Congo hemorrhagic fever in Iran, the country's health ministry has said in a statement. The disease has caused the death of 3 people so far in the country. One of them was a pregnant woman. However, an examination will be conducted to find out what actually caused the woman to die, APA's Tehran bureau reported. The rector of the Shiraz University of Medical Sciences said that another person diagnosed with this type of fever had to come to Shiraz but died before arriving. An examination is underway to find the cause of the death. Crimean-Congo hemorrhagic fever (CCHF) is a widespread tick-borne viral disease that is endemic in Africa, the Balkans, the Middle East and Asia. Onset of symptoms is sudden, with fever, myalgia, (muscle ache), dizziness, neck pain and stiffness, backache, headache, sore eyes and photophobia (sensitivity to light). There may be nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, abdominal pain and sore throat early on, followed by sharp mood swings and confusion. After 2 to 4 days, the agitation may be replaced by sleepiness, depression and lassitude, and the abdominal pain may localize to the upper right quadrant, with detectable hepatomegaly (liver enlargement). Iran's Health Ministry has recommended cattle-breeders use preventive means, such as gloves, boots, etc. [Byline: Suleyman Farzaliyev] -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail [The presence of Crimean-Congo hemorrhagic fever virus (CCHFV) in Iran was 1st identified in studies of livestock sera and ticks in the 1970s, but the 1st human infection was not diagnosed until 1999. Since that time, the number of cases of CCHF in Iran has markedly increased. Through January 2012, a total of 870 confirmed cases have been reported in published literature, with 126 deaths and a case fatality rate (CFR) of 17.6 percent. The disease has been seen in 26 of the country's 31 provinces, with the greatest number of cases in Sistan and Baluchestan, Isfahan, Fars, Tehran, Khorasan, and Khuzestan provinces [ ]. Because CCHF has been reported in most of Iran's neighboring countries, the control of imported livestock may play an important role in reducing disease incidence [ ]. Improved public awareness regarding the methods of disease transmission and preventive measures for the high risk groups can help reduce the number of cases. - Mod.UBA A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  .] [", "CONJUNCTIVITIS - FRENCH CARIBBEAN TERRITORIES: (GUADELOUPE, MARTINIQUE) *********************************************************************** A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Wed 7 Jun 2017 From: Aubert Lyderic [edited] Since May 2015, the French Caribbean territories experience an outbreak of viral conjunctivitis. According to the general practitioners (GP) sentinel network, the number of medical consultations due to conjunctivitis during the last 2 weeks (W2017-20 and W2017-21) was estimated between 500 and 600 cases per week in Guadeloupe and 150 and 250 cases per week in Martinique. The beginning of the outbreak in week 2017-20 [week 14 to 20 May 2017] was confirmed by the GP's network on the 2 territories. Their reports showed that the outbreak had spread in Guadeloupe Archipelago from Marie-Galante island and in Martinique, the center and the south of the island are currently the most affected areas. As of today [Wed 7 Jun 2017], around 35 percent of municipalities of the 2 territories do not report any case. The peak does not seem to have been reached. In order to determine the etiology of this outbreak, biological samples were performed on conjunctiva and naso-pharynx from cases of conjunctivitis who consulted in emergency departments of the main public hospitals of both territories. The 1st analyses confirmed presence of enteroviruses with significant viral loads. Results from biological investigation of adenovirus are not yet known. Among the conjunctivitis specimens testing positive for enteroviruses, samples were sent to the National Reference Centre for Enteroviruses (Lyon, France) for further characterization. Outbreaks of viral conjunctivitis occur mainly in tropical countries with high population density, hot and humid climate. They are mostly attributed to adenoviruses and enteroviruses (EV). Enteroviruses are ubiquitous pathogens responsible for a large range of infections. There is no specific antiviral treatment. In the Caribbean and in the American region, several outbreaks of conjunctivitis have also been reported (Haiti, Dominican Republic, Mexico, French Guiana and Surinam) but the pathogen has not yet been identified. The source of the week epidemiological bulletin (will be update soon at this link):  . -- Aubert Lyderic National Public Health Agency Regional Office of French Caribbean Territories [Conjunctivitis, also known as pinkeye, is an inflammation of the conjunctiva. The conjunctiva is the thin clear tissue that lies over the white part of the eye and lines the inside of the eyelid. There are a number of different causes, including infectious agents such as Viruses (Adenoviruses, Enteroviruses), Bacteria (gonorrhea or chlamydia), or Allergies to dust, pollen, contact lenses. Both viral and bacterial conjunctivitis are highly contagious. Each of these types of germs can spread from person to person in different ways. They are usually spread from an infected person to others through: - close personal contact, such as touching or shaking hands - the air by coughing and sneezing - touching an object or surface with germs on it, then touching your eyes before washing your hands.  . Infectious conjunctivitis caused by some bacteria and viruses can spread easily from person to person, but is not a serious health risk if diagnosed promptly. As confirmed by laboratory diagnosis in the above report, the causative agent for most of the tested cases was enteroviruses. Most cases of viral conjunctivitis are mild. The infection will usually clear up in 7 to 14 days without treatment and without any long-term consequences. But in some cases, viral conjunctivitis can take 2 to 3 weeks or more to clear up. An antiviral medication can be prescribed to treat more serious forms of conjunctivitis for which there is a specific treatment, such as those caused by herpes simplex virus or varicella-zoster virus. Antibiotics will not improve viral conjunctivitis. - Mod.UBA] [The HealthMap/ProMED maps can be found at: Guadeloupe, Guadeloupe: and, Martinique: . - Mod.MPP] [", "SCRUB TYPHUS - NEPAL (03): (BARA) ********************************** A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases A 35-year old female from Gadimai Municipality-16, Bara District (Province 2) was admitted on [Fri 2 Jun 2017] with acute fever associated with headache, arthralgia, myalgia and retroorbital pain of 9 days to Sukraraj Tropical and Infectious Disease Hospital. She [had been] treated as a typhoid fever locally without clinical improvement. Clinically she had conjunctival injection with laboratory finding of transaminitis and thrombocytopenia. There was no history of travel. Serology for leptospirosis, dengue, [brucellosis] and malaria were negative without growth in blood culture. IgM Elisa for scrub typhus [was] positive. She started with doxycycline and fever is responding. This case might be the 1st reported case from Nepal in 2017. Scrub typhus surged in Nepal following [the] earthquake in 2015. It might be in part [due to the] availability of diagnostic laboratory facilities and people staying in the temporary shelter infested by rodents. Treatment with simply available antibiotics [is] quite effective; however, delay in diagnosis and proper management can be fatal in scrub typhus. -- Communicated by: Dr Anup Bastola, MD, MCTM, Consultant Tropical Medicine Physician Sukraraj Tropical and Infectious Disease Hospital, Teku, Kathmandu [ProMED-mail would like to thank Dr. Bastola for this submission. There have been prior reports on scrub typhus cases in Nepal earlier this year (see prior ProMED-mail posts, Scrub typhus - Nepal (02): (RO) http://promedmail.org/post/20170217.4846555 and Scrub typhus - Nepal: winter season http://promedmail.org/post/20170111.4757908). Scrub typhus is transmitted by the bite of a 6-legged chigger, the larval form of the trombiculid family of 8-legged mites. Chiggers are most active during warmer summer months ( ). Chiggers live in shaded grassy areas and tend to be more abundant during rainy spells because they need a high-level of humidity in order to survive. During the heat of the afternoon or during long dry spells, they may retreat toward the moist soil. Once chiggers have fed on humans, they drop off of their host and transform into nymphs, which then develop into adult mites that feed on plant material and are harmless to humans. Bara District, with a population (2011) of 687 708 residents is located in south central Nepal; its climate is mainly lower tropical (below 300 meters or 1000 ft.) ( ). - Mod.ML A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  .] [", "POLIOMYELITIS UPDATE (09): SYRIA (DEIR AL ZOUR), CONFIRMED CIRCULATING VACCINE DERIVED POLIOVIRUS ************************************************************************************************* A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases In this update: [1] Syria - confirmation of cVDPV2 - GPEI [2] Syria cVDPV2 - media [3] Global update - GPEI ****** [1] Syria - confirmation of cVDPV2 - GPEI Date: Thu 8 Jun 2017 Source: Global Polio Eradication Initiative [edited] A circulating vaccine-derived poliovirus type 2 (cVDPV2) outbreak has been confirmed in the Deir-Ez-Zor [Deir Al Zour] Governorate of the Syrian Arab Republic. The virus strain was isolated from 2 cases of acute flaccid paralysis (AFP), with onset of paralysis on [5 March 2017 and 6 May 2017], as well as from a healthy child in the same community. Outbreak response plans are being finalized, in line with internationally-agreed outbreak response protocols, including plans for targeted vaccination campaigns to rapidly raise population immunity. An initial risk analysis has been conducted, finding low overall population immunity levels in the area but solid levels of disease surveillance. Active searches are being conducted for additional cases of acute flaccid paralysis. Surveillance and immunization activities are also being strengthened in neighboring countries. Although access to Deir-Ez-Zor is compromised due to insecurity, the Governorate has been partially reached by several vaccination campaigns against polio and other vaccine-preventable diseases since the beginning of 2016. Most recently, 2 campaigns have been conducted in March and April 2017 using bivalent oral polio vaccine ([bOPV]). However, only limited coverage was possible through these campaigns. Syria also introduced 2 doses of inactivated polio vaccine in the infant routine immunization schedule in 2018 [As we are not yet in 2018 it is unclear if the plans are to introduce the IPV in 2018 or if it has already been introduced and should read 2017 or 2016. - Mod.MPP]. The detection of the cases demonstrates that disease surveillance systems are functional in Syria. The polio programme is working with local authorities and organizations on the ground to respond immediately, using proven strategies. In 2013-2014, Deir-Ez-Zor was the epicentre of a wild poliovirus type 1 (WPV1) outbreak, resulting in 36 cases at the time. This outbreak was successfully stopped; the now-detected cVDPV2 strain is unrelated to the WPV1 outbreak. Circulating VDPVs are extremely rare forms of poliovirus, mutated from strains in the oral polio vaccine (OPV) that can emerge in under-immunized populations. OPV has been a critical tool in eliminating 99.9 percent of polio cases worldwide, and while cVDPV is rare, the GPEI is actively working with countries to eradicate both vaccine-derived and wild polio. The same strategies that are eliminating wild poliovirus also stop cVDPV - it remains critical that all countries maintain strong disease surveillance and ensure all children are vaccinated. Global Polio Eradication Initiative World Health Organization Avenue Appia 20, 1211 Geneva 27 Switzerland -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail [The HealthMap/ProMED map of Syria can be found at:  . The Deir Al Zour Govenorate is located near the border with Iraq. - Mod.MPP] ****** [2] Syria cVDPV2 - media Date: Thu 8 Jun 2017 Source: STAT News [edited] An outbreak of vaccine-related polio cases has been reported in war-torn Syria, the World Health Organization announced [Thu 8 Jun 2017] another hurdle for a nearly 30-year eradication effort that has seen more than its share of setbacks. A total of 2 children in the Deir-Ez-Zor governorate in eastern Syria have been paralyzed by the vaccine viruses. The virus has been recovered from a 3rd child who was not paralyzed. All signs point to vaccine viruses that are circulating in the area. Detailed planning is already underway for emergency vaccination programs to reach about 200 000 children in the region, Michel Zaffran, head of the WHO's polio program, told STAT. The government of Syria has made a formal request for the emergency vaccination effort, he said. Given the 6-year-old civil war in that country, the endeavor will be logistically challenging. But Syria experienced a polio outbreak in 2013 and 2014, and it was extinguished. In that case, the outbreak was caused by so-called wild polioviruses. The new cases are vaccine-derived polioviruses [VDPV] viruses from the oral polio vaccine used in some developing countries -- and not an indication that the viruses are spreading as they are in Afghanistan and Pakistan, believed to be the only 2 countries in the world where wild polioviruses still circulate. \"It's still complex,\" Zaffran admitted. The Global Polio Eradication Initiative has a long history of operating in places of political instability and has been successful in the past in negotiating so-called \"days of tranquility\" in which ceasefires allow vaccination teams to reach otherwise hard-to-reach children. In mid-May [2017], an anonymous contributor reported to the online disease surveillance system ProMED that there was a cluster of children who had suffered what's called acute flaccid paralysis [AFP] in Syria. Sudden onset of paralysis can be caused by a number of things, but in parts of the world where polio is still a threat, it must be ruled out when such cases arise. The polio program has received reports of 58 children in the region who have recently experienced acute flaccid paralysis. Testing showed the vaccine viruses were not responsible in 11 of these cases, but further testing remains to be done on samples from the others. Getting samples from Deir-Ez-Zor to laboratories in Damascus and Ankara that can do the testing isn't easy or quick. \"This is still a work in progress,\" Zaffran said. \"We have samples that have reached the lab that have tested negative. We have samples that have reached the lab and have not yet been completely tested. And we have samples that have been collected that are still stuck in Syria and are not yet transported.\" Oral polio vaccine is made using live but weakened viruses; the original formulation contained components to protect against all 3 polioviruses, types 1 through 3. Type 2 polioviruses stopped circulating nearly 20 years ago. While highly effective, the oral vaccine has some rare but serious side effects. The weakened viruses can spread from a vaccinated child to other children, with whom he or she is in contact, also passively vaccinating them. But as the viruses spread from child to child they can mutate to become virulent again, regaining the power to cripple. That's what has happened in Syria. And there may be more cases, Zaffran acknowledged. Genetic analysis shows the viruses from the 3 children are related and have been circulating for a period of about 2 years, Zaffran said. The fact that vaccine viruses have been circulating for that long suggests a lot of children in the region have not been successfully immunized against polio. \"That can only happen in populations that have low immunity,\" he said. The type 2 component of the oral polio vaccine is the most likely of the 3 to regain virulence. As a result, last year [2016] in a globally coordinated maneuver called \"the switch\" all countries that use oral vaccine had to stop administering the 3-component type and adopt a version that only protects against type 1 and type 3 polioviruses. But supplies of a special monovalent or single-strain vaccine that protects against type 2 polio have been stockpiled in case outbreaks like the type in Syria crop up. This is the vaccine that will be used in this emergency response. Zaffran said response planners are hoping to move quickly but must ensure that the effort is effective at reaching as many children as possible. That's because they know putting more type 2 vaccine viruses into an environment where there are unimmunized children risks igniting future outbreaks like this one. \"Speed is relatively important but quality is going to be even more important,\" Zaffran said. \"We want to really interrupt the transmission, protect the population and ensure that we don't seed more of these ... [outbreaks]. So it's going to be important to do it very properly.\" [Byline: Helen Branswell] -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail Rapporteur George A Robertson ****** [3] Global update - GPEI Date: Thu 8 Jun 2017 Source: Global Polio Eradication Initiative [edited] Poliovirus Weekly Update 07-Jun-2017, World Health Organization New wild poliovirus cases reported this week: 0 Total number of wild poliovirus cases in 2017: 5 Total number of wild poliovirus cases in 2016: 37 New cVDPV cases reported this week: 2 Total number of cVDPV cases in 2017: 6 Total number of cVDPV cases in 2016: 5 Headlines  - In Syria, a circulating vaccine-derived poliovirus type 2 (cVDPV2) outbreak has been confirmed. The virus strain was isolated from 2 cases of acute flaccid paralysis (AFP) and one healthy contact, from Deir-Ez-Zor governorate.  - The final decision made by the World Health Assembly on 29 May 2017 on polio transition planning is now available online. The decision follows extensive discussions by Member States on the need to address the challenge of scaling down the polio programme as eradication comes closer, including the potential impact on achieving and sustaining a polio-free world, on health system programmes and on systems currently supported by polio assets. Delegates welcomed existing efforts to plan for the post-polio world, and stressed the importance of care, considered and strategic approaches to the transition of polio assets, requesting the Director-General to prepare a detailed transition action plan.  - Summary of newly-reported viruses this week: Syria - 2 new circulating vaccine-derived poliovirus type 2 (cVDPV2) isolated from acute flaccid paralysis (AFP) cases and one cVDPV2 isolated from a healthy contact; and, Pakistan - 4 new environmental sample positive for wild poliovirus type 1 (WPV1). Afghanistan  - No new wild poliovirus type 1 (WPV1) cases were reported in the past week. The total number of cases for 2017 remains 3, and for 2016 remains 13. The most recent case had onset of paralysis on [Tue 21 Feb 2017], from Kunduz province.  - With most of Afghanistan polio-free, efforts are focused on continuing to strengthen operations, in close coordination with Pakistan, to address remaining low-level transmission in the common reservoir area of the Quetta-Kandahar corridor.  - Afghanistan is carrying out a programme review focusing on the implementation of the National Emergency Action Plan and making necessary adjustments for the 2nd half of 2017.  - Polio eradication teams from East and South East Afghanistan and neighboring FATA and Khyber Pakhtunkhwa in Pakistan met in Kabul on 24 - 25 May 2017 to review the current coordination mechanisms and agree on additional measures to further improve implementation in the WPV common reservoirs. Core teams from the National Emergency Operation Centres Afghanistan and Pakistan also met to discuss next steps on further improving the vaccination strategies for high risk mobile populations. Pakistan  - No new wild poliovirus type 1 (WPV1) cases were reported in the past week. The total number of WPV1 cases for 2017 remains 2, and for 2016 remains 20. The most recent case had onset of paralysis on [13 Feb 2017], from Diamir district, Gilgit Baltistan.  - A total of 4 new positive WPV1 environmental samples were reported in the past week, from Peshawar, Khyber Pakhtunkhwa (KP) collected on 10 May 2017; and, Karachi Gadap, Karachi Landhi and Sukkur, Sindh, collected on 8, 16 and 12 May 2017, respectively.  - The year 2016 saw the lowest ever annual number of polio cases in the country but poliovirus continues to be isolated through environmental surveillance over a significant geographical range. Efforts are ongoing through implementation of the national emergency action plan to address remaining gaps in coverage and surveillance, in close coordination with neighboring Afghanistan.  - The National Polio Management Team is meeting on [8 - 9 June 2017] to review implementation of the National Emergency Action Plan during the low transmission season, and to agree on essential adjustments to the plan for the 2nd half of 2017. Nigeria  - No new cases of wild poliovirus type 1 (WPV1) were reported in the past week. The total number of WPV1 cases for 2016 remains 4 and no cases have been reported in 2017. The most recent case had onset of paralysis on [21 Aug 2016] in Monguno Local Government Area (LGA), Borno.  - Nigeria continues to implement emergency response to the detected WPV1 strain and circulating vaccine-derived poliovirus type 2 (cVDPV2) strains affecting the country.  - The response is part of a broader regional outbreak response, coordinated with neighboring countries, in particular the Lake Chad sub-region, including northern Cameroon, parts of Central African Republic, Chad and southern Niger.  - Detection of the polio cases in Nigeria underscores the risk posed by low-level undetected transmission and the urgent need to strengthen subnational surveillance. Lake Chad Basin  - The detection of wild poliovirus type 1 (WPV1) and circulating vaccine-derived poliovirus type 2 (cVDPV2) in Nigeria poses a risk to the neighboring countries of the Lake Chad basin and hence an outbreak response plan is being implemented as part of the response to the Nigeria outbreak.  - Emergency outbreak response efforts continue across the Lake Chad basin, together with activities to fill subnational surveillance gaps across the region. Central Africa  - No new cases were reported in the past week. The Democratic Republic of the Congo (DR Congo) is affected by 2 separate outbreaks of circulating vaccine derived poliovirus type 2 (cVDPV2), in Haut Lomami province (2 cases, with onset of paralysis on [8 Mar 2017 and 20 Feb 2017]); and in Maniema province (2 cases with onset of paralysis on [26 Mar 2017 and 18 Apr 2017], with an additional isolate detected in a healthy individual with sample collection on 2 May 2017).  - Outbreak response plans are currently being finalized, with supplementary immunization activities using monovalent oral polio vaccine type 2 (mOPV2) in line with internationally-agreed outbreak response protocols. Surveillance and immunization activities are being strengthened in neighboring countries.  - DR Congo is also affected by an Ebola outbreak, in Bas Uele province in the north of the country. Coordination among both outbreak response teams will be necessary and teams are already working on this. Syrian Arab Republic  - In Syria, a circulating vaccine-derived poliovirus type 2 (cVDPV2) outbreak has been confirmed. The virus strain was isolated from 2 cases of acute flaccid paralysis (AFP) and one healthy contact (collection date: 25 April 2017), from Deir-Ez-Zor governorate. The cases had onset of paralysis on [5 Mar 2017 and 6 May 2017].  - No case of WPV1 has been reported in Syria since 21 Jan 2014.  - Outbreak response plans are being finalized, in line with internationally-agreed outbreak response protocols. Although access to Deir-Ez-Zor is compromised due to insecurity, the Governorate has been partially reached by several vaccination campaigns against polio and other vaccine-preventable diseases since the beginning of 2016. Most recently, 2 campaigns have been conducted in March and April 2017 using the bivalent oral polio vaccine (OPV). However, only limited coverage was possible through these campaigns. Officially reported wild poliovirus cases as of 06 Jun 2017 Total global cases in 2017: 5 (compared with 16 for the same period in 2016) Total in endemic countries in 2017: 5 (compared with 16 for the same period in 2016) Total in non-endemic countries in 2017: 0 (compared with 0 for the same period in 2016)  - Afghanistan: 3 cases in 2017 (compared with 5 for the same period in 2016), onset of paralysis of most recent case: 21-Feb-17  - Pakistan: 2 cases in 2017 (compared with 11 for the same period in 2016), onset of paralysis of most recent case: 13-Feb-17  - Nigeria: 0 case in 2017 (compared with 0 for the same period in 2016), onset of paralysis of most recent case: 21-Aug-16  - Total global cases in 2016: 37  - Total in endemic countries: 37  - Total in non-endemic countries: 0 Officially reported cVDPV cases as of 06 Jun 2017 Total global cases in 2017: 6 (compared with 3 for the same period in 2016)  - Syrian Arab Republic: 2 cases in 2017 (compared with 0 for the same period in 2016), onset of paralysis of most recent case: 06-May-17  - Democratic Republic of the Congo: 4 cases in 2017 (compared with 0 for the same period in 2016), onset of paralysis of most recent case: 18-Apr-17  - Pakistan: 0 case in 2017 (compared with 0 for the same period in 2016), onset of paralysis of most recent case: 17-Dec-16  - Nigeria: 0 case in 2017 (compared with 0 for the same period in 2016), onset of paralysis of most recent case: 28-Oct-16  - Lao People's Democratic Republic: 0 case in 2017 (compared with 3 for the same period in 2016), onset of paralysis of most recent case: 11-Jan-16  - Total global cases in 2016: 5  - Total in endemic countries: 2  - Total in non-endemic countries: 3 -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail [ProMED-mail 1st learned of the suspected polio cases in Syria on 2 May 2016 with further information from the EpiCore Surveillance Project that a cVDPV was suspected on 6 May 2016 (see Poliomyelitis update (06): Syria (DY), cVDPV susp http://promedmail.org/post/20170512.5032401 and Poliomyelitis update (05): Syria (DY) susp, RFI http://promedmail.org/post/20170506.5015784). In these prior reports, there was mention that there was a cluster of 23 AFP [acute flaccid paralysis] cases in Miadin district and that specimens were being sent to CDC in Atlanta for confirmation. From the above reports, it appears as though there has been confirmation of 2 cases of polio associated with a cVDPV2 infection, and a 3rd asymptomatic contact, also infected with the cVDPV2, but in section [2] the number of suspected cases of AFP is now at 58, with 11 infections ruled out to date, but many more remain to be tested so we should expect further updates (and possibly more confirmed cases) as the information becomes available. The detailed discussion of these cases and the challenges facing both the outbreak control as well preventing additional future cases of cVDPV2 are well covered in Helen Branswell's article presented in [2] above. The HealthMap/ProMED map of Syria can be found at:  . With respect to the global update presented in section [3] above, the main changes are the update on Syria and the continued isolation of wild polioviruses (WPVs) in environmental samples in Pakistan. The good news is that there are still only 5 cases of polio attributable to WPV infection reported worldwide this year (2017), with the most recent date of onset of illness reported to be in February of 2017 (the 13th in Pakistan and the 21st in Afghanistan). The not so good news is the continued isolation of WPV1 from environmental samples in Pakistan and the occurrence and identification of cVDPVs in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Syria and possibly Mozambique (see Poliomyelitis update (07): Mozambique, Congo DR, VDPV, RFI http://promedmail.org/post/20170525.5060299). A map showing the locations of both WPV and cVDPV cases can be found at: . - Mod.MPP] [", "LEGIONELLOSIS - USA (04): (ARIZONA) NEONATAL, UNDERWATER BIRTHING ***************************************************************** A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Tue 6 Jun 2017 Source: Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report (MMWR) Weekly 66(22);590-591, posted online [edited] Notes from the Field. Two Cases of Legionnaires' Disease in Newborns After Water Births -- Arizona, 2016 -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- Granseth G, Bhattarai R, Sylvester T, Prasai S, Livar E. Legionnaires' disease is a severe, sometimes fatal disease characterized by fever, myalgia, cough, and clinical or radiographic pneumonia, caused by inhaling or aspirating small droplets of water containing Legionella bacteria.* In 2015, approximately 6000 cases of Legionnaires' disease were reported in the United States (1). Nearly 10 percent of cases are fatal (2). The number of reported cases of Legionnaires' disease in Arizona has increased in recent years. Surveillance data from Arizona's Medical Electronic Disease Surveillance Intelligence System (MEDSIS) identified 46 reported cases in 2011 and 93 in 2015 (3), representing more than a 100 percent increase. During 2011-2015, only one case was reported in an infant aged 1300 Healthcare-Associated Infection contacts, shared with the local Association for Professionals in Infection Control and Epidemiology Chapter, and disseminated to all licensed midwives in the state. The materials are public and posted on the ADHS website at  . * . \u2020 The urine antigen is only designed to detect serogroup 1; however, cross reactions with other serogroups have been documented. \u00a7  .  . [The full article is available at the source URL.] -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail [Legionnaires' disease is uncommon in children and exceedingly rare in neonates. Infected children have usually had many of the same risk factors for legionellosis as have adults. Most reported cases have involved children with malignancies, severe combined immunodeficiency, chronic granulomatous disease, organ transplantation, and prolonged treatment with corticosteroids, or who have preexisting respiratory disease (1,2). ProMED-mail previously reported aspiration of _Legionella_-contaminated water was the source for neonatal legionnaires' disease that occurred following use of a home birthing pool in the UK (ProMED-mail post Legionellosis - UK: (England) neonatal, underwater birthing http://promedmail.org/post/20140708.2594991). The type of _Legionella_ bacteria found in the birthing pool was found to be the same strain that caused legionnaires' disease in the baby. _Legionella_ neonatal infection after birth in birthing pools had previously been reported from Italy and Japan (3,4). Neonates with legionellosis may develop necrotizing pneumonia with signs of sepsis and multisystemic involvement that may progress rapidly to respiratory failure and death (5). 1. 2. Greenberg D, Chiou CC, Famigilleti R, Lee TC, Yu VL. Problem pathogens: paediatric legionellosis--implications for improved diagnosis. Lancet Infect Dis. 2006; 6:529-35. 3. Franzin, L, Scolfaro C, Cabodi D, Valera M, Tovo PA. _Legionella pneumophila_ Pneumonia in a Newborn after Water Birth: A New Mode of Transmission. [Nosocomial _L. pneumophila_ serogroup 1] Clin. Infect. Dis. 33:e103-e104. Available at:  . 4. Nagai T, Sobajima H, Iwasa M, Tsuzuki T, et al. Neonatal Sudden Death Due to _Legionella_ Pneumonia Associated with Water Birth in a Domestic Spa Bath [Community-acquired, _Legionella pneumophila_ serogroup 6] J Clin Microbiol. May 2003; 41(5): 2227-2229. Available at: . 5. Holmberg RE Jr, Pavia AT, Montgomery D, et al. Nosocomial _Legionella_ pneumonia in the neonate. Pediatrics. 1993; 92:450-3. - Mod.ML A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  .] [", "RABIES (25): AFRICA (EGYPT) BOVINE, EQUINE, OIE *********************************************** A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Thu 8 Jun 2017 Source: OIE, WAHID (World Animal Health Information Database), weekly disease information 2017; 30(23) [edited] Rabies, Egypt ------------- Information received on [and dated] 8 Jun 2017 from Dr Ibrahim Mahrous Saleh Mohamed, Chairman, General Organization for Veterinary Services (GOVS), Ministry of Agriculture and Land Reclamation, Cairo, Egypt Summary Report type: immediate notification Start date: 21 Mar 2017 Date of confirmation of the event: 23 Mar 2017 Reason for notification: recurrence of a listed disease Date of previous occurrence: 1990 Manifestation of disease: clinical disease Causal agent: Rabies virus Serotype: not typed Nature of diagnosis: clinical, laboratory (basic and advanced) This event pertains to a defined zone within the country New outbreaks (1) Summary of outbreaks: Total outbreaks: 1 Outbreak 1: El Dakhala, Al Wadi Al Jadid Date of start of the outbreak: 21 Mar 2017 Outbreak status: resolved 30 Apr 2017 Epidemiological unit: backyard Total animals affected Species / Susceptible / Cases / Deaths / Killed and disposed of / Slaughtered Cattle / 1 / 1 / 1 / 0 / 0 Equidae / 1 / 1 / 1 / 0 / 0 Affected population: a domestic donkey and a bovine in a backyard. Outbreak statistics [rates apparent, expressed as percentages] Species / Morbidity rate / Mortality rate / Case fatality rate / Proportion susceptible animals lost* Cattle / 100 / 100 / 100 / 100 Equidae/ 100 / 100 / 100 / 100 *Removed from the susceptible population through death, destruction, and/or slaughter Epidemiology Source of the outbreaks(s): biting from stray dog. Control measures Measures applied: vaccination permitted (if a vaccine exists), no treatment of affected animals Measures to be applied: vaccination in response to the outbreak(s), surveillance outside containment and/or protection zone, surveillance within containment and/or protection zone, official disposal of carcasses, by-products and waste, disinfection Diagnostic test results Laboratory name and type: Animal Health Research Center (AHRI) (national laboratory) Species / Test / Test date / Result Equidae / fluorescent antibody virus neutralisation (FAVN) / 27 Apr 2017 / Positive Cattle / chromatographic immunoassay / 23 Mar 2017 / Positive Cattle / fluorescent antibody virus neutralisation (FAVN) / 23 Mar 2017 / Positive Future reporting The event is continuing. Weekly follow-up reports will be submitted. [The location of the outbreak can be seen on the interactive map included in the OIE report at the source URL above.] -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts [Rabies is still a pervasive global threat. Half of the world's population live in an endemic area, and more than 80 percent of deaths occur in rural areas, where access to health education campaigns and post-bite prophylaxis is limited or inexistent. Africa and Asia are the continents with the highest risk of human mortality, with more than 95 percent of the world's fatal cases. These regions are also those where canine rabies is controlled the least ( ). For several years, in their OIE annual reports, Egypt has communicated that rabies is a disease which has been absent since 1990, and that in 2016 they vaccinated 3393 cats and 19 548 dogs. Such coverage seems very low given that the human population in the country is 91 million. If only 1 percent of the population owned dogs and cats, one would expect that close to one million dogs and cats would be vaccinated. In this same report, the only control measures applied are \"precautions at the borders\". No other type of surveillance or control is done. - Mod.CRD A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  .] [", "EQUINE INFECTIOUS ANEMIA - GERMANY (02): (LOWER SAXONY) ******************************************************* A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Thu 8 Jun 2017 Source: Verden district (Lower Saxony) press release [in German, trans. submitter SZ, edited] A case of equine infectious anaemia [EIA] has officially been confirmed in a horse from a holding in Hagen-Grinden (county of Verden [an der Aller, Lower Saxony]). The viral disease, which can infect horses, donkeys, and mules, is a notifiable animal disease. The veterinary authorities of the district have established a restricted area around the village of Hagen-Grinden. The affected animal has already been killed, and all susceptible animals in the restricted area have been examined, as per the relevant Animal Disease Regulation. According to the veterinary authorities additional restrictions are in force in the restricted area. \"Equine infectious anaemia, although widespread worldwide, is very rare in Germany,\" explains Dr Peter Rojem, county veterinarian of Verden county. The virus can not be transmitted to humans. Only equines are susceptible to this viral disease, according to Dr Rojem. Viral transmission is mainly through blood-sucking insects like horse flies and biting flies. Other means of transmission, such as transmission between animals, are very rare. Therefore, in this case, according to the assessment of the official veterinarian, in all probability, no further spread of the disease is to be expected. All horses in the same holding tested negative. Diseased animals only show general symptoms, Dr Rojem continues. These include pale colour of mucous membranes, weakness, loss of weight, fever, loss of appetite as well as miscarriages and erratic movements. Animals can also show no symptoms and thus can act as undetected sources of infection. The disease is incurable. A therapy or vaccination is neither possible nor permitted. All horses and other equines in the restricted area -- within a radius of about 1 kilometre [0.6 mi] around the affected holding -- are now to be investigated clinically and serologically for the viral disease. The holdings affected have been informed. In addition, there are further restrictions laid down in the published emergency measures of the county of Verden. Thus, all equines in the area have to be housed. The animals can not be moved from the restricted area without authorization from the veterinary authorities. In addition, equine exhibitions and events in the restricted area are prohibited. The veterinary authority advises horse owners to protect their horses from blood sucking insects by appropriate means. \"A lifting of the restrictions is only possible after 3 months, preceded by re-examination of all horses in the restricted area (with negative results),\" emphasizes Dr Rojem. -- Communicated by: Sabine Zentis Castleview English Longhorns Gut Laach D-52385 Nideggen Germany [The previous EIA outbreak in Germany (Bavaria) was reported by Germany to the OIE in January 2017 (http://promedmail.org/post/20170119.4777963); earlier cases had been recorded during 2015. Subscribers are referred to the following commentary by Mod.CRD, as included in the said post: \"Equine infectious anaemia (EIA) is a persistent viral infection of equids. The causative agent, EIA virus (EIAV) is a lentivirus in the family Retroviridae, subfamily Orthoretrovirinae. EIA can be diagnosed on the basis of clinical signs, pathological lesions, serology, and molecular methods. Infected horses remain viraemic carriers for life and, with very rare exceptions, yield a positive serological test result. \"Antibody response usually persists and antibody-positive animals, older than 6-8 months, are identified as virus carriers (below 6-8 months of age, serological reactions can be due to maternal antibodies; status can be confirmed by molecular techniques). Infected equids are potential virus reservoirs. Biting flies are mechanical vectors for the virus in nature.\" ( ) Between December 2014 and December 2015, 7 outbreaks of EIA were reported in Germany. These outbreaks were located in the provinces of Saxony (3) and Bavaria (4). A total of 13 cases were diagnosed from a susceptible population of 160 animals (equidae). All affected animals (cases) were destroyed. The event was resolved on November 2015. See the final report, dated 17 Dec 2015, at  . EIA virus is not considered a risk for human health\". An interactive OIE map presenting EIA cases in Europe since Jan 2015 is available at http://tinyurl.com/y86etwcq (click on Europe, zoom in). Maps of Germany can be seen at and  . Verden is a district in the centre of Lower Saxony (Niedersachsen), Germany (map at ). - Mod.AS] [", "BARLEY YELLOW DWARF - IRELAND: (WEXFORD) **************************************** A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Tue 6 Jun 2017 2:01 PM IST Source: AgriLand [edited] The growth of a serious barley problem in the south-east -------------------------------------------------------- Most spring barley fields in the Wexford [County] area are affected, to some degree, by barley yellow dwarf virus (BYDV) this year [2017], according to Teagasc's [Agriculture and Food Development Authority] Ciaran Hickey. \"It can be as low as 5 per cent of the field affected in some areas. But the average is more like 15 per cent, with some fields up to 30 per cent. There is an obvious yellow cast across the area.\" The scale of the BYDV challenge is set to grow [and] is now a real talking point with both feed and malting barley growers. BYDV is more apparent in later-sown crops and sheltered, coastal areas. \"The reality is that we now have a grain aphid population that is resistant to the pyrethroid aphicides that are currently available. Farmers are deeply concerned.\" He said that new chemistries to control aphids had failed to materialise. His feeling was that this may be due to the longer registration periods that are required to get new products onto the market. \"BYDV is a real yield-robber. The launch of a new aphicide had previously been expected for 2017. But this has now been put back. The potential is there for serious problems to be created down the line. BYDV is a battle which [farmers] cannot win at the present time, as they do not have the required tools.\" [Byline: Richard Halleron] -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail [Barley yellow dwarf (BYD) disease occurs worldwide and affects a wide range of grass species (Gramineae) including cereal crops like barley, wheat, oats, rice, maize, and rye. It is the most destructive of the virus diseases of wheat. Grain yields may be reduced by 1/3rd. Symptoms include leaf discolouration from yellow to purple (depending on the host species), stunting, reduced tillering, and empty seed heads. Plants infected in autumn may not survive the winter or show severe symptoms when growth resumes. Diseased plants often occur in circular patches within a field, which are associated with colonisation by the aphid vectors. BYD viruses have now been split into several species in the family Luteoviridae (mostly in the genus _Luteovirus_). They are differentiated by their ability to be transmitted by various aphid species (family Aphididae) and their virulence on a selected variety of oats. Some of the viruses are transmitted equally well by several aphids, whereas others can be transmitted by only one or 2 species. The bird cherry(-oat) aphid (_Rhopalosiphum padi_) and grain (wheat) aphid (_Sitobion avenae_) are vectors of the severe _Barley yellow dwarf virus-PAV_ (type member of genus _Luteovirus_). Coinfections of several BYD viruses may occur in one plant, which can result in either more severe (synergistic) or milder (due to cross protection) symptoms, depending on the virus partners. The viruses cannot be transmitted by seed, pollen or mechanical means and cannot survive in stubble or in the soil. Volunteer cereal plants or grassy weeds may serve as pathogen reservoirs. Disease management includes use of resistant cultivars and control of the aphid vectors. Maps Ireland: and Irish counties: Europe, overview: Pictures BYD symptoms: (wheat) and  (winter barley) BYD-affected and healthy wheat plants: Wheat field with BYD symptoms: BYD aphid vectors on cereal leaf: Links BYD information:  ,  ,  , and  (incl. disease cycle) BYD viruses and list of wheat viruses: Virus taxonomy and current species list of luteoviruses via: Information, pictures and taxonomy for Aphididae species: Teagasc: - Mod.DHA] [", "ANTHRAX - INDIA (07): (ODISHA) BEEF JERKY ***************************************** A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Fri 9 Jun 2017 07:20 AM IST Source: The Indian Express, Express News Service [edited] Anthrax scare has again gripped a village in Koraput district. One person has been hospitalised and 6 others have been affected by the disease in Bondaguda village under Mastiput panchayat of the district. A health team from District Headquarters Hospital has rushed to the village to provide preliminary treatment. The [7] affected [have been identified and one] has been shifted to hospital for better treatment. According to sources, villagers dry beef for 3 months from April to June and store it in their houses for consumption. Due to consumption of the stale meat, people often fall prey to the disease, a team member said, adding that awareness is the need of the hour. Meanwhile, the Koraput Citizens' Forum urged Collector Anupam Saha to conduct massive awareness camps through veterinary department on giving up the habit of consuming beef in the villages. -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail [Maps of India can be seen at  and  . Koraput is one of the southernmost municipalities of Odisha state. For a description and map go to . If the source was dried beef the affected animal may have been butchered any time in the previous 3-4 months. Also excess jerky (US)/biltong (South Africa)/uppu kandam (Tamil Nadu) would have been given to relatives, friends and neighbours, and sold in nearby street markets. In regions where a poor relative will be managing a farm for a rich cousin or sibling in a nearby town, any sick or dead animal will be skinned and butchered, the carcass meat converted to jerky and stored, and the head put somewhere safe -- usually on a roof. Thus when the rich relative visits the farmer can show that the animal was not stolen and give his relative all the easily transported bits to deal with as he likes. This report only hints at jerky being the source. The 7 affected might have been the butchering team. For a description of jerky, go to  and for uppu kandam, go to  . - Mod.MHJ] [", "JAPANESE ENCEPHALITIS - TAIWAN ****************************** A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Thu 8 Jun 2017 18:43:14 TWN Source: Focus Taiwan News Channel, Central News Agency (CNA) report [edited] The Centers for Disease Control said [Thu 8 Jun 2017] doctors confirmed that a 45-year-old Ukrainian woman working in Tainan, southern Taiwan, has contracted Japanese encephalitis, the 2nd such case this year [2017]. The patient, initially experienced a severe headache and fever, but lost consciousness and was hospitalized on [30 May 2017]. She was confirmed as having contracted Japanese encephalitis on [Wed 7 Jun 2017]. The CDC said health officials have determined the patient has not received related vaccinations and not traveled overseas recently. They identified her daily routine as traveling from her residence to her place of work in Danei District with occasional shopping trips to Yujing District. The health authorities have tentatively ruled out the possibility that the woman contracted the disease at her residence. Currently, no one in regular contact with her has developed any symptoms. A previous Japanese encephalitis case this year [2017] was reported in Kaohsiung. The disease usually appears between May and October, with the 3 spotted mosquito [_Culex tritaeniorhynchus_ ?] the main carrier. The disease peaks between June and July and vaccination is most effective in preventing infection, the CDC said. >From 2012-2016, 32, 16, 18, 30, and 23 annual cases of Japanese encephalitis were reported in Taiwan. [Byline: Chen Wei-ting, Lilian Wu] -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail [The Japanese encephalitis (JE) virus transmission season in Taiwan has begun. JE virus is endemic in Taiwan and has caused cases sporadically there during the May-October season. _Culex_ mosquitoes are abundant enough there to accomplish transmission of the virus from birds and swine to people. Japanese encephalitis is a vaccine-preventable disease; the affected individual above had not been vaccinated. The only measures to prevent infection are vaccination and avoidance of mosquito bites. Maps of Taiwan can be seen at  and  . - Mod.TY] [", "ANTHRAX - PAKISTAN: (FEDERALLY ADMINISTERED TRIBAL AREAS) LIVESTOCK, ANTHRAX SUSPECTED ************************************************************************************** A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Thu 8 Jun 2017 Source: MENAFN (Middle East North Africa Financial Network), Tribal News Network (TNN) [edited] At least 40 cows and goats have been killed due to an outbreak of a mysterious disease in Toda Cheena area of Central Kurram Agency [Federally Administered Tribal Areas]. Residents of the small village say every house has been affected due to the disease. A local resident told TNN that his 3 cows expired during the last one week. He said this disease affects healthy cattle within a day or 2 and kills them. The area people said the disease has killed 30 cows and 13 goats in the village so far. They demanded the government send doctors for vaccination of cattle in the area. Veterinary physician Inzar Gul told TNN that from the symptoms it seems the cattle have been affected from anthrax disease. However, he said it could be verified only after tests. -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail [Maps of Pakistan can be seen at  and  . >From colleagues working in the country I am informed that livestock anthrax is common in northwestern Pakistan (Kurram Agency, North Waziristan, Frontier Region Kohat, and Orakzai Agency in the Federally Administered Tribal Areas (FATA) and Kohat district in Khyber Pakhtunkhwa province, previously called North-West Frontier Province). Latterly reports to Paris of any bovine outbreaks only started in 2007, and as \"+\" or disease present; in the previous decade there were erratic reports of anthrax outbreaks in sheep and goats but none affecting cattle. The latest report to OIE Paris was for 2014 and merely stated that the disease was present in the country. Some guidance may be available from the fact that they vaccinated 1 percent of their 96 million sheep and goats but none of their 40 million cattle. - Mod.MHJ] [", "MUMPS UPDATE (20): USA (ILLINOIS, NEW YORK, MASSACHUSETTS) ********************************************************** A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases In this update: [1] Illinois, McLean county [2] Illinois, Algonquin [3] New York, Capital region [4] Massachusetts, Boston ****** [1] Illinois, McLean county Date: Tue 6 Jun 2017 Source: The Pantagraph [edited] A total of 5 McLean County residents have confirmed cases of mumps, leading the county health department on [Tue 6 Jun 2017] to encourage people experiencing symptoms to isolate from others until they can be tested for the virus. None of the 5 residents -- ages 22 -- 52 -- needed to be hospitalized and all are recovering, said Lisa Slater of the McLean County Health Department. The agency is working with the infected individuals and notifying their close contacts about possible exposure to the virus. \"We need to protect our most vulnerable populations -- those who cannot get the measles-mumps-rubella (MMR) vaccine because of age or illness -- from exposure to mumps virus,\" Melissa Graven, health department communicable disease supervisor, said in a statement for several days. People experiencing symptoms should stay home and call their health care provider. Everyone else should make sure they are up to date with their MMR vaccinations and, if they aren't, to make vaccination a priority, the health department said. [Byline: Paul Swiech] -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts [A map of Illinois, United States can be found at  ] ****** [2] Illinois, Algonquin Date: Wed 7 Jun 2017 7:23 PM Source: Daily Herald [edited] A total of 3 more Jacobs High School students have tested positive for mumps, bringing the number of confirmed cases in the district to 6, school officials announced [Wed 7 Jun 2017]. All 6 students previously had been vaccinated, according to a news release from Community Unit District 300. The 3 students who most recently tested positive for mumps went to class through the last day of school, which was 25 May [2017], the release said. Students and staff members who are not vaccinated or have compromised immune systems have been kept out of the school since 15 May [2017], when the 1st student tested positive for mumps. None of the 3 students who recently tested positive shared classes, athletics or activities within the school setting, school officials said. The school district, along with the health departments in Kane and McHenry counties, is monitoring the cases. Mumps symptoms include fever, headache, muscle aches, tiredness, loss of appetite and swollen glands, according to the Kane County Health Department. [Byline: Katie Smith] -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts ****** [3] New York, Capital region Date: Thu 8 Jun 2017 Source: Times Union [edited] If you feel like you might have a bad cold, don't shrug it off. Swollen jaw or not, it could be mumps. The Capital Region [New York] is experiencing its 1st outbreak of mumps in years, with 45 cases in the 4-county region so far in 2017. For some parts of the area, these are the 1st cases of mumps in several years. And in Rensselaer County this year's 2 reported cases are the 1st seen there in 20 years, said Public Health Director Mary Fran Wachunas. Albany County has seen the lion's share of mumps this year [2017], with 29 cases. Most of them are traceable to 2 locations where the virus that causes the disease has spread. One is the University at Albany, where 22 patients had an association. The other is a local sports team, which had 6 cases. Mumps cases by county, 2017 Albany : 29 Saratoga: 13 Rensselaer: 2 Schenectady: 1 In Saratoga County, where there have been 13 diagnosed cases of mumps, however, the patients are not connected by community, facility or demographic. That caused county officials to advise residents with suspected mumps symptoms to see a doctor immediately. The most well-known symptom of mumps are swollen glands under the ears or jaw. But some patients who have the illness do not have that telltale sign, said Dr Rebecca Kobos, medical director for student health at UAlbany. Headache, muscle aches, loss of appetite and fever may be enough to indicate mumps, Kobos said, especially if a patient has been exposed to someone with the virus. Her advice: See a doctor and take it seriously. Rest and stay away from work or school, so you don't expose other people to the illness. Rare but serious complications of mumps include swelling of the reproductive organs or the brain, as well as deafness. Common sense is also handy. \"Precautions as simple as regular handwashing and covering one's mouth when coughing can go a long way to halt the spread of the virus,\" said Catherine Duncan, director of public health in Saratoga County. [Byline: Claire Hughes] -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts [A map of New York, United States, can be found at  ] ****** [4] Massachusetts, Boston Date: Fri 9 Jun 2017 Source: Eastie Times [edited] The state's Department of Public Health's (DPH) spokeswoman Ann Scales confirmed that some of 12 new cases of mumps that are part of an ongoing outbreak in the area originated in East Boston. Since the end of March [2017], 12 cases have been reported in Eastie, Boston, Chelsea and Revere among the neighborhood's Latino population. Scales said the DPH will be reaching out to the Latino communities here and in the other communities affected by the outbreak in order to increase awareness about mumps and to encourage vaccination. The DPH usually sees mumps outbreaks among college-age individuals attending local colleges and universities. However, what makes this outbreak unique is it is among adults ranging in age from 20 to 41 with no known connection to higher education. All of the residents hit by the outbreak are Latino and include members of the Colombian, Dominican, Guatemalan, and Salvadoran communities. None of those affected is known to have traveled internationally prior to becoming ill. For the majority of the residents, vaccination histories are unknown but most are believed to be unvaccinated against mumps. Unvaccinated individuals are most susceptible to mumps infection. Health officials reported that this outbreak 'may represent a change in the epidemiology of mumps in Massachusetts'. \"MMR vaccination is highly protective against mumps and is recommended for children and adults,\" said Public Health Commissioner Monica Bharel, MD, MPH, referring to the Measles, Mumps, and Rubella (MMR) vaccine. \"In addition, those who have mumps should stay isolated at home for 5 days after their onset of swelling. Mumps is usually a mild disease but can cause serious illness. If you think you have mumps, stay home and call your healthcare provider.'' According to the DPH mumps virus is spread through infected respiratory tract secretions. It can be spread within 3 -- 6 feet when an infected person coughs or sneezes or with direct contact with infected secretions like sharing water bottles. The incubation period can range from 12 -- 25 days. Parotitis, or swelling of the salivary glands, is the most common symptom but non-specific symptoms such as myalgia, anorexia, malaise, headache, and low-grade fever may precede the parotitis by several days. In the pre-vaccine era, 15--30 percent of infections were asymptomatic. People are considered infectious from 2 days before symptoms begin until 5 days after the onset of parotid swelling. Therefore, those suspected of mumps should be isolated and should refrain from public activities for 5 days after the onset of swelling. DPH and local health departments are investigating these cases and instituting isolation and quarantine measures to control the spread of mumps. East Boston Neighborhood Health Center could not confirm if any of the confirmed cases were treated at the clinic. [Byline: John Lynds] -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts [A map of Massachusetts, United States can be found at  ] [According to the CDC [edited], from 1 Jan -- 20 May 2017, 42 states and the District of Columbia in the U.S. reported mumps infections in 3176 people to CDC. Mumps is no longer very common in the United States. From year to year, mumps cases can range from roughly a couple hundred to a couple thousand. For example in 2016, there were approximately 5833 cases reported to CDC, and in 2012, there were 229. Before the U.S. mumps vaccination program started in 1967, about 186 000 cases were reported each year, but the actual number of cases was likely much higher due to underreporting. Since the pre-vaccine era, there has been a more than 99 percent decrease in mumps cases in the United States. See for a map and figure showing incidence of mumps since 2000. - Mod.LK A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  .] [", "MERS-COV (36): SAUDI ARABIA (RIYADH), NOSOCOMIAL TRANSMISSION ************************************************************* A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Fri 9 Jun 2017 Source: Saudi MOH 9 Jun 2017 [edited] As of 14:00 [2:00 PM] today [Fri Jun 2017], there have been a total of: 1648 laboratory-confirmed cases of MERS-CoV infection, including 668 deaths [reported case fatality rate 40.5 percent], 943 recoveries, and 37 currently active cases/infections. [As previously mentioned, the numbers of deaths, recoveries and currently active cases come from my spreadsheet tallies and differ from those listed on the Saudi MOH website; my spreadsheet counts asymptomatic infections. - Mod.MPP] Since the last ProMED-mail update [Thu 8 Jun 2017], there have been a total of: 6 newly confirmed cases/infections [6 asymptomatic contacts] 0 newly reported fatalities, and 1 newly reported recovery. Information on newly confirmed cases 6 asymptomatic infections  - all expat females  - all from Riaydh [Riyadh Region]  - all in healthcare workers  - all listed as currently stable  - all classified as secondary healthcare acquired cases in healthcare workers.) Ages of the 6 newly confirmed infected individuals: 26-years-old 28-years-old 31-years-old 34-years-old 48-years-old 27-years-old Information on newly reported recovery: - A 58-year-old expat male, non-healthcare worker from Riyadh [Riyadh region] with a history of pre-existing co-morbidities. [most likely the 58-year-old expat male reported as a newly confirmed asymptomatic infection yesterday 8 Jun 2017 at which time he was noted to be in stable condition. He was classified as a secondary hospital acquired case in a patient. - Mod.MPP] -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail [Nosocomial transmission in Riyadh continues with 6 newly confirmed asymptomatic infections in healthcare workers. Of interest was a report carried on CIDRAP (the Center for Infectious Disease Research and Policy of the University of Minnesota) published yesterday [Thu 8 Jun 2017] which mentioned that according to \"Maria Van Kerkhove, PhD, an epidemiologist who is the WHO's technical lead for MERS-CoV (Middle East respiratory syndrome coronavirus), the cases are from different Riyadh hospitals. She added that Saudi Arabia's Ministry of Health (MOH) is conducting extensive contact tracing, which includes testing high-risk contacts, even if they don't have symptoms.\" (see  ). Shedding light on the observation that there are multiple foci of transmission ongoing in Riyadh at this time. Since 1 June 2017 there have been 34 reports of newly confirmed cases of MERS-CoV infection in Saudi Arabia of whom all but 3 were reported from Riyadh, with 23 of these reports involving asymptomatic contacts of confirmed clinically ill MERS-CoV infected individuals. I repeat my question of yesterday [Thu 8 Jun 2017] - what is going on here? Are there improved testing protocols for asymptomatic contacts? Has the virus undergone change that permits easier transmissibility among human hosts? The HealthMap/ProMED map of Saudi Arabia can be seen at:  . - Mod.MPP] [", "DRUG ABUSE - USA (02): (GEORGIA) POTENTIALLY LETHAL UNKNOWN SUBSTANCE ********************************************************************* A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases [1] Date: Thu 8 Jun 2017 Source: EpiCore Surveillance Project Local (Atlanta, GA) news has reported several overdose cases of the use opiod products \"laced\" with fentanyl. WSB Channel News reported this week [week of 4-10 Jun 2017] that yellow pills stamped with the name \"Percoset\" on them were actually fentanyl pills; these pills led to at least one death. This video clip from WSB Channel 2 news contains more information on this issue. -- Communicated by: EpiCore Surveillance Project [ProMED-mail would like to thank our EpiCore Surveillance Project member for alerting us almost immediately after receipt of a request for further information, on the fentanyl component of these pills. - Mod.MPP] ****** [2] Date: Thu 8 Jun 2017 Source: Georgia Bureau of Investigation (GBI) [edited] On [Wed 7 June 2017], the Georgia Bureau of Investigation's Crime Lab received evidence related to the reported overdoses in the Central Georgia area. Preliminary results indicate a mixture of 2 synthetic opioids, with one of the drugs being consistent with a new fentanyl analogue. This fentanyl analogue has not previously been identified by the GBI Crime Lab. Due to the nature of the analysis, testing to confirm the full identity of the drug will require additional time. The GBI Crime Laboratory continues to make the analysis a priority. The Georgia Bureau of Investigation, the Georgia Department of Public Health, Georgia Poison Center, hospitals, local, state, and federal partners are working jointly on this investigation. [Byline: Nelly Miles] -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail ****** [3] Date: Thu 8 Jun 2017 From: Katherine Fogelberg [edited] This sounds like carfentanil - an opioid derivative that is often used for megafauna (elephants, rhinoceroses, etc.) sedation/anesthesia and is usually injected IM via dart. There are some reports in the news of this drug being imported from East Asia (I believe it may have 1st surface in Ohio?). Carfentanil is 10 000 times more potent than morphine (100 times more potent than fentanyl). The DEA also released the following statement regarding a rise in carfentanil overdoses/exposures dating back to Sep 2016: If this ultimately is what ends up being identified in the drug analysis, my best suggestion is to contact the local zoo veterinarian, as these drugs have long been used in zoos by veterinarians and intensive and detailed protocols have been written at all institutions using the drug to help guide those who may need to respond to a potential human exposure. The biggest risk in these exposures is re-narcotization, which might explain why the large doses of naloxone were needed. I look forward to hearing the results of the testing; please feel free to email with any questions. -- Katherine Fogelberg University of Tennessee health sciences center ****** [4] Date: Thu 8 Jun 2017 From: Ken Waldrup, DVM [email address withheld by request] In the northern states, they have been having problems with heroin laced with a carfentanil derivative. The legal carfentanil drug is approximately 700 times more potent than heroin so naloxone has a difficult time reversing such a potent opioid. In dealing with large ungulates immobilized with carfentanil, veterinarians learned that naloxone couldn't cut it 30 years ago. Naltrexone is the reversal agent of choice with veterinary use of carfentanil. -- Ken Waldrup DVM [email withheld on request] ****** [5] Date: Jun 9, 2017 2:33 PM From: \"Powell, Ryan\" Re: Drug Abuse - USA: (GA) pot. lethal unknown substance, RFI The article \"Drug Abuse - USA: (GA) pot. lethal unknown substance, RFI\" resonated with me because of the fentanyl crisis occurring in British Columbia, Canada. The reaction to the drugs after use, and the necessity of naloxone for counteraction sounds very similar to the effects of fentanyl and it will be interesting to hear if that is what the substance is identified as. -- Ryan Powell Laboratory Technician Greater Nanaimo Pollution Control Centre Regional District of Nanaimo [A total of 2 individuals have mentioned carfentanil. Indeed, this drug does seem to more closely resemble the situation reported in the original release. On the other hand, the lab believes it has found what is a fentanyl analogue. Carfentanil has a relationship to fentanyl and could be described as a fentanyl analogue, or perhaps the lab has not considered veterinary drugs, especially since carfentanil is not appropriate for human dosages. However, I would be skeptical that the lab is not aware of carfentanil. The lab has mentioned the product is a fentanyl analogue so it seems unlikely that it would just be fentanyl as described in the article/video from Canada. Although, perhaps lab wanted to double check and used this as a way to buy some time. I would be surprised if that was the case, but knowing the need for laboratory correctness and the political sensitivity of this, it could be possible. - Mod.TG A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  .] [", "VENEZUELAN HEMORRHAGIC FEVER - VENEZUELA **************************************** A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Tue 6 Jun 2017 Source: El Nacional [in Spanish, trans. Mod.TY, edited] Venezuela hemorrhagic fever [VHF] continues endemic in the country and extends is geographic range. The Ministry of Health informed the Panamerican Health Organization on 15 April 2017 that in 2016, 142 suspected cases of this disease were reported, 126 of which were in Barinas state, and of these cases 21 died. Only 7 cases were confirmed. Also in Portuguesa [state] 16 patients were reported, of which 5 died. Of these, only 3 cases were confirmed [as VHF] This information was issued by the We Defend Epidemiology Network and explained that this fever, which appeared for the 1st time in 1989, with a total of 5 epidemic outbreaks, is caused by direct contact or via the respiratory route with cane rat excreta. The symptoms are high fever, muscle pain, sore throat, anorexia, diarrhea, vomiting and cough. On the 7th or 8th day, hemorrhagic complications appear followed by multiple organ failure and occasionally, convulsions. The outbreak last year [2016] is the 2nd most severe for incidence of cases, following that which occurred in 2002, and it is expected that 2017 will have another epidemic. The areas most affected by this disease, which occurs exclusively in Venezuela, until now have been in Portuguesa state in the municipalities of Guanarito, Papel\u00f3n and San Genaro. In Barinas, just in Sosa municipality and western Gu\u00e1rico. It has spread to other municipalities in Barinas since 2015, and for the 1st time the greatest incidence in this place than in Portuguesa state. 'This situation could be explained by seasonal variation in rodent populations in the affected areas and greater exposure of inhabitants in rural areas to rodent habitat, due to increase in lands for agricultural use,\" the Network stated in an announcement. There is no vaccination or treatment for this fever, just vital support to maintain the patient. On [30 Jan 2016] the Venezuelan Society of Public Health and the Network issued the 1st bulletin announcing the outbreak, that was 1st known from local communication in Barinas and that was confused with DHF. In a short time young adults, a child, a pregnant woman, and an elderly person died, 5 of whom were members of the same family. On this past 15 April [2017], the Ministry informed the Pan American Health Organization about the 142 cases of this disease in 2016 [Byline: Isayen Herrera] -- Communicated by: Kathryn Soderholm From ProMED-ESP [The causitive agent of Venezuelan hemorrhagic fever is Guanarito virus, an arena virus which has _Zygodontomys brevicauda_ (short-tailed cane mouse) and _Sigmodon alstoni_ (Alston's cotton rat) as its natural host. These rodents are widely distributed in the eastern savannas [Llanos Occidentales] in the west of Venezuela. - Mod.JT (in Spanish, trans. Mod.TY) Interestingly, the above report provides some of the requested information about case numbers in 2016 issued in the ProMED-mail post Venezuelan hemorrhagic fever - Venezuela: (BA) susp, RFI http://promedmail.org/post/20160210.4007649. VHF has occurred sporadically in Venezuela, with a 40 percent case fatality rate. As Mod.JT mentioned, the rodent reservoirs of Guanarito virus are the Alston's cotton rat _Sigmodon alstoni_ (see image at  ) and the short-tailed cane mouse _Zygodontomys brevicauda_ (see image at ). - Mod.TY References (provided in ProMED-mail archive no. http://promedmail.org/post/20160210.4007649 by the late Mod.JW): ---------- 1. Salas R, de Manzione N, Tesh RB, et al: Venezuelan haemorrhagic fever. Lancet. 1991; 338(8774): 1033-6; abstract available at  . 2. Tesh RB, Wilson ML, Salas R: Field studies on the epidemiology of Venezuelan hemorrhagic fever: implication of the cotton rat _Sigmodon alstoni_ as the probable rodent reservoir. Am J Trop Med Hyg. 1993; 49(2): 227-35; abstract available at  . A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  .] [", "AVIAN INFLUENZA (114): LUXEMBOURG, POULTRY, HPAI H5N8, OIE, REQUEST FOR INFORMATION *********************************************************************************** A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Fri 9 Jun 2017 Source: OIE, WAHID [edited] Highly pathogenic avian influenza, Luxembourg --------------------------------------- Information received on 9 Jun 2017 from Dr Felix Wildschutz, Directeur, Administration des Services Veterinaires, Ministere de l'Agriculture, de la Viticulture et du Developpement Rural, Luxembourg Summary Report type: immediate notification Date of start of the event: 30 May 2017 Date of confirmation of the event: 2 Jun 2017 Reason for notification: reoccurrence of a listed disease Date of previous occurrence: 1956 Manifestation of disease: clinical disease Causal agent: highly pathogenic avian influenza virus Serotype: H5N8 Nature of diagnosis: laboratory (advanced) This event pertains to the whole country. New outbreaks (4) Outbreak 1: Keispelt, Capellen Date of start of the outbreak: 30 May 2017 Outbreak status: resolved on 2 Jun 2017 Epidemiological unit: farm Affected animals Species / Susceptible / Cases / Deaths / Killed and disposed of / Slaughtered Birds / - / - / 2 / 10 / 0 Affected population: Layers and geese Outbreak 2: Feulen, Diekirch Date of start of the outbreak: 30 May 2017 Outbreak status: resolved on 2 Jun 2017 Epidemiological unit: farm Affected animals Species / Susceptible / Cases / Deaths / Killed and disposed of / Slaughtered Birds / - / - / 3 / 12 / 0 Affected population: Layers and broilers Outbreak 3: Schrassig, Luxembourg Date of start of the outbreak: 30 May 2017 Outbreak status: resolved on 2 Jun 2017 Epidemiological unit: farm Affected animals Species / Susceptible / Cases / Deaths / Killed and disposed of / Slaughtered Birds / - / - / 15 / 140 / 0 Affected population: Layers Outbreak 4: Rollingen, Mersch Date of start of the outbreak: 2 Jun 2017 Outbreak status: resolved on 6 Jun 2017 Epidemiological unit: farm Affected animals Species / Susceptible / Cases / Deaths / Killed and disposed of / Slaughtered Birds / - / - / 56 / 625 / 0 Affected population: Layers, geese, geese, quails and pigeons. Summary of outbreaks Total outbreaks: 4 Total animals affected Species / Susceptible / Cases / Deaths / Killed and disposed of / Slaughtered Birds / - / ** / 76 / 787 / 0 ** Not calculated because of missing information Epidemiology Source of the outbreak(s) or origin of infection: Introduction of new live animals Control measures Measures applied: selective killing and disposal, disinfection, vaccination prohibited, no treatment of affected animals Measures to be applied: no other measures Diagnostic test results Laboratory name and type / Species / Test / Test date / Result Luxembourg Institute of Health (National laboratory) / Birds / polymerase chain reaction (PCR) / 2 Jun 2017 / Positive Future reporting The event is continuing. Weekly follow-up reports will be submitted. [The location of the outbreak can be seen on the interactive map included in the OIE report at the source URL above.] -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail [Based on a 6 Jun 2017 press release from Luxembourg's Ministry of Agriculture \"a 4th outbreak of bird flu was confirmed in a poultry farm in Rollingen/Mersch. All poultry present on the premises have been euthanized\" (see ProMED-mail posting http://promedmail.org/post/20170606.5088082). However, this current OIE report mentions that \"selective killing and disposal\" of the affected poultry population was done. In addition, the quantitative information that was provided does not identify the size of the susceptible population. We only know that 76 birds died, and 787 were killed. Given that HPAI has not been reported in the country since 1956, and the fact that the disease can spread rapidly, it would be of interest to know whether the 787 birds that were killed represented all birds that were affected in these 4 outbreaks or whether in fact, if \"selectively\" culled, there are many other birds that are susceptible that were not depopulated. The report further indicates that the origin of infection was the introduction of new live animals. It would be important to learn where these \"new live animals\" came from and what exposure they may have had prior to being introduced into the flock that became infected. - Mod.CRD A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  .] [", "INFLUENZA, CANINE - USA (03): (NORTH CAROLINA) DOG SHOW LINK ************************************************************ A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: 7 Jun 2017 Source: Charlotte Observer [edited] Veterinarians are urging dog owners to take precautions after the highly contagious canine influenza killed 2 dogs in North Carolina and is suspected of sickening others. The sick dogs are apparently linked to dog shows last month [May 2017] in DeLand, Florida and Perry, Georgia. The dead dogs were from the Raleigh area and North Carolina's coast. No cases have been reported in the Charlotte area, and sickened dogs usually recover from the flu. But because the virus spreads so easily, local vets, kennel owners, and shelters are on high alert. \"This is not a time to panic, not a time to be overly concerned, but it is a time to be prudent,\" said veterinarian Jim Dobies, who owns UrgentVet Pet Clinic in Belmont and Fort Mill, S.C. Dobies recommends that healthy dogs be vaccinated. Dogs suspected of having the flu should be isolated from other dogs, and their vets consulted. Healthy dogs must be kept away from sick ones. Clinical signs include coughing, lethargy, nasal discharge and fever and can mimic the highly contagious but nonfatal disease known as kennel cough. Canine flu can be tough to diagnose, Dobies said, because tests can reveal it only in a narrow window of time and can't be confirmed in-house. Suspected cases have swept through the dog world since the flu was identified in Chicago in 2015, the American Kennel Club says. North Carolina reported 225 suspected cases that year. The AKC says recent outbreaks have been reported in Florida, Georgia, Illinois, Kentucky, Missouri, South Carolina and Texas. The state agriculture department's Animal Welfare Section is closely monitoring vets, kennels, doggie daycare businesses and shelters. Dog owners can find up-to-date reports at  . Dr. Patricia Norris, who heads the section, said that in addition to 2 dead dogs, a cluster of suspected cases has been reported in coastal counties, and a couple have been reported in the Raleigh-Durham area. One dog in Davidson County, northeast of Charlotte, was at the Florida dog show and is under quarantine. Norris advises owners who suspect their dogs are sick to keep them from even casual contact with other dogs, such as at dog parks or greenways. Healthy dogs should be safe in such places, she said, but owners should be cautious. Concerned dog owners should call their vet, Norris said. Vaccines are advisable in some cases but not in others, she said, depending on the dog's circumstances. \"We want to be careful,\" she said. \"We don't want to cause a panic, but to be vigilant.\" Canine Influenza [Source: American Kennel Club]: - The virus spreads through the air and can travel up to 20 feet. - It lives up to 24 hours on soft surfaces and 48 hours on hard surfaces. - 80 percent of all dogs exposed to it will contract the virus, although not all will show signs. - Sick dogs show signs within 48 hours and can spread the virus for up to 28 days. - While most sick dogs will recover with treatment, untreated dogs can develop potentially fatal pneumonia. [Byline: Bruce Henderson] -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail [These dogs were at a dog show, which means this virus could be carried to multiple areas within multiple states. Please check with your veterinarian about an examination and necessary vaccinations. If you were at the dog show, your assistance in preventing the spread of this virus is very important. Keep your dog isolated from other animals for a minimum of 10 days. This virus can be deadly, as the article points out. Since this was a dog show, we may be seeing a lot of scattered outbreaks in the near future, although we hope all dogs remain safe and uninfected. All owners should be vigilant at dog parks, green ways and any other social outing with pets. The best protection is the vaccine and your vigilance regarding where you take your dog. - Mod.TG A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  .] [", "EQUINE HERPESVIRUS - NORTH AMERICA (16): USA (PENNSYLVANIA) EQUINE ****************************************************************** A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: 8 Jun 2017 Source: The Horse [edited] The Equine Disease Communication Center (EDCC) has reported a new case of equine herpesvirus-1 (EHV-1) in a horse in Pennsylvania. \"The Pennsylvania Department of Agriculture confirmed a case of equine herpesvirus myeloencephalopathy (EHM) by RRT-PCR testing (wild-type virus),\" a 7 Jun 2017 update from the EDCC said. \"The horse resided at a very small private barn in Bucks County, Pennsylvania. Although the investigation is ongoing, it appears there are very few horses with known or potential exposures to this horse. Quarantine of exposed or potentially exposed horses with monitoring of temperatures and clinical status has been implemented and will continue for a minimum of 21 days.\" Herpesvirus is highly contagious among horses and can cause a variety of ailments in equids, including rhinopneumonitis (a respiratory disease usually found in young horses), abortion in broodmares, and EHM (the neurologic form). In many horses, fever is the only sign of EHV-1 infection, which can go undetected. In addition to fever, other common signs of EHV-1 infection in young horses include cough, decreased appetite, depression, and a nasal discharge. Pregnant mares typically show no signs of infection before they abort, and abortions usually occur late in gestation (around 8 months), but can be earlier. Abortions can occur anywhere from 2 weeks to several months following infection with EHV-1. Horses with the neurologic form usually have a fever at the onset of the disease and might show signs of a respiratory infection. A few days later, neurologic signs such as ataxia (incoordination), weakness or paralysis of the fore- and hind-limbs, urine retention and dribbling, loss of tail tone, and recumbency (inability to rise) develop. [Byline: Erica Larson] -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail [As this article points out, fever may be the only sign and is the earliest sign. Hopefully, the horses under quarantine are having their temperatures taken twice daily. - Mod.TG A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  .] [", "CHIKUNGUNYA (19): AMERICAS, ASIA, OBSERVATIONS, RESEARCH ******************************************************** A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases In this update: [1] Cases in various countries: Regional summaries --- Americas --- Regional summary WHO/PAHO report Mexico and Central America --- Mexico (Morelia, Michoacan state) Costa Rica South America --- Brazil: (Minas Gerais state) Asia --- China (Guangdong) Taiwan Philippines M'lang north Cotabato, Soccsksargen region (Region XII) India: - Delhi and neighboring area - Karnataka state - Ahmedabad Gujarat state [2] Global expansion [3] Comorbidity and disease [4] Arthralgia persistence [5] Treatment [6] Persistent vascular disease ****** Cases in various countries: Regional summaries --- Americas --- WHO/PAHO report 2 Jun 2017 Reported cases of chikungunya fever in the Americas, by country or territory - 2017 to EW 22 [week ending 2 Jun 2017]. Cases before EW 17 are not given but are available at the above URL. ---------------------------------------------------------------------- Cases by Country / Week / (Local Susp. / Local Conf. / Imported Conf. / Deaths North America --- Mexico / week 20 [week ending 19 May 2017] / 0 / 15 / 0 / 0 USA / week 21 [week ending 26 May 2017] / 0 / 0 / 9 / 0 Central American Isthmus --- Costa Rica / week 20 [week ending 19 May 2017] / 148 / 0 / 0 / 0 El Salvador / week 20 [week ending 19 May 2017] / 238 / 0 / 0 / 0 Nicaragua / week 20 [week ending 19 May 2017] / 377 / 0 / 0 / 0 Panama / week 17 [week ending 28 Apr 2017] / 716 / 8 / 1 / 0 Latin Caribbean --- French Guiana / week 17 [week ending 28 Apr 2017] / 65 / 19 / 0 / 0 Puerto Rico / week 19 [week ending 12 May 2017] / 0 / 8 / 0 / 0 Andean Area --- Bolivia / week 19 [week ending 12 May 2017] / 2144 / 0 / 0 / 0 Colombia / week 20 [week ending 19 May 2017] / 570 / 8 / 0 / 0 Ecuador / week 17 [week ending 28 Apr 2017] / 0 /85 / 0 / 0 Peru / week 21 [week ending 26 May 2017] / 871 / 249 / 0 / 0 Southern Cone --- Brazil / week 19 [week ending 12 May 2017] / 57 724 / 28 225 / 0 / 13 Paraguay / week 18 [week ending 5 May 2017] / 739 / 4 / 0 / 0 -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail [Maps showing the location of the affected islands and countries mentioned above and below can be accessed at  ; North America at ; Central America at ; Caribbean and South America at . - Mod.TY] Cases in various countries not mentioned above or with more recent case numbers. Mexico and Central America --- Mexico (Morelia, Michoacan state). 26 May 2017. (conf.) 1 case. [in Spanish] Costa Rica. 7 May 2017. 1st 13 weeks of 2017, (susp.) 686 cases, (conf.) 142 cases. South America --- Brazil: (Minas Gerais state). 30 May 2017. (susp.) 15 988 cases; Region most affected: Governador Valadares.  . Asia --- China (Guangdong). 31 My 2017. (reported) 8 cases, all imported from South Asia [country not specified]. [Report from PRO/MBDS ] [A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map showing the location of Guangdong province can be accessed at: . - Mod.TY] Taiwan. 9 Apr 2017. (conf.) 2 imported cases, one ex Philippines and one ex Indonesia. [Maps of Taiwan can be seen at  and  . - Mod.TY] Philippines M'lang north Cotabato, Soccsksargen region (Region XII). 17 Feb 2017. (conf.) 50 cases. [A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map of the Philippines can be accessed at:  . - Mod.TY] India:  - Delhi and neighboring area. 6 Jun 2017. (reported) 131 cases, 35 cases in Delhi in just one week. [A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map of India can be accessed at:  . - Mod.TY]  - Karnataka state. 20 Mar 2017. (susp.) 841 cases, (conf.) 101 cases: Localities most affected: Chitradurga. (susp) 159 cases (conf.) 28 cases, Bengaluru Urban (susp.) 139 cases, (conf.) 3 cases, Davangere (susp.) 125 cases (conf.) 12 cases, Mysuru (susp.) 139 cases (conf.) 3 cases.  - Ahmedabad Gujarat state. 21 Feb 2017. (reported) 88 cases in last 48 days. -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail and Roland Hubner Superior Health Council Brussels Belgium ****** [2] Global expansion Date: May 2017 [published on line ahead of print] Source: International Journal of Infectious Diseases DOI:  [edited] Braira Wahid, Amjad Ali, Shazia Rafique, Muhammad Idrees. Global expansion of chikungunya virus: mapping the 64-year history. -------------------------------------- Highlights - Chikungunya virus (CHIKV) is a mosquito-transmitted alphavirus. - The global distribution shows that CHIKV is expanding at an alarming rate. - CHIKV has the potential to spread to new areas because it is a travel-associated febrile illness. - The 4 different genotypes of CHIKV are Asian, West African, East/Central/South African (ECSA), and Indian Ocean Lineage (IOL). - The disease originated in Africa and has since affected the entire globe. - This global health menace has affected millions of people in tropical and sub-tropical countries. Summary Chikungunya virus (CHIKV) is a mosquito-transmitted alphavirus that is emerging as a global threat because of the highly debilitating nature of the associated disease and unprecedented magnitude of its spread. Chikungunya originated in Africa and has since spread across the entire globe causing large numbers of epidemics that have infected millions of people in Asia, the Indian subcontinent, Europe, the Americas, and Pacific Islands. Phylogenetic analysis has identified 4 different genotypes of CHIKV: Asian, West African, East/Central/South African (ECSA), and Indian Ocean Lineage (IOL). In the absence of well-designed epidemiological studies, the aim of this review article was to summarize the global epidemiology of CHIKV and to provide baseline data for future research on the treatment, prevention, and control of this life-threatening disease. -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail [ProMED-mail readers interested in this historical and current overview of CHKV are urged to see the entire article at the above URL. - Mod.TY] ****** [3] Comorbidity and disease Date: Sat 29 Apr 2017 Source: The Indian Express [edited] Less than a year after the capital saw its worst ever chikungunya [fever] outbreak, an AIIMS [All India Institute of Medical Sciences] study has revealed that the vector-borne infection is associated with \"significant morbidity.\" The study also revealed that the disease, due to comorbidity, can lead to neurological complications and multi-organ dysfunction. Comorbidity is the presence of one or more additional diseases or disorders co-occurring with a primary disease. In case of chikungunya, the presence of certain diseases -- such as hypertension and diabetes -- makes a person more vulnerable to the vector-borne infection, the study has found. The AIIMS study, which examined prevalence of concurrent infections in patients with chikungunya fever, revealed that 28 percent of the patients were found to have comorbidity, indicating the viral infection can prove fatal to those suffering from such conditions. The study further revealed that the outbreak was associated with \"atypical\" complications associated with chikungunya [virus infections], with 7 percent of the total cases examined under the study resulting in death. \"However, the deaths cannot be attributed to the mosquito-borne infection alone,\" professor Sanjeev Sinha, department of medicine at AIIMS, said. The study, which examined 264 cases, revealed that hypertension (10.2 percent), diabetes (9.4 percent), chronic kidney disease (3.7 percent) and cardiac illness (3 percent) were the most common comorbid conditions associated with chikungunya [virus] infection. [Byline: Kaunain Sheriff M] -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts ****** [4] Arthralgia persistence Date: April 2017 Source: Emerg Infect Dis. 2017;23(4):673-676.  [edited] Feldstein LR, Rowhani-Rahbar A, Staples J, Weaver MR, Halloran M, Ellis EM, et al. Persistent Arthralgia Associated with Chikungunya Virus Outbreak, US Virgin Islands, December 2014-February 2016. ------------------------------------- Abstract After the 2014-2015 outbreak of chikungunya virus in the US Virgin Islands [USVI], we compared the prevalence of persistent arthralgia among case-patients and controls. Prevalence was higher in case-patients than controls 6 and 12 months after disease onset. Continued vaccine research to prevent acute illness and long-term sequelae is essential. Conclusions From our year-long study of 165 case-patients and 167 controls, we found an almost 3-fold increased risk for persistent arthralgia in CHIKV case-patients at 6 and 12 months after illness onset. At 12 months, case-patients were significantly (p less than 0.01) more likely than controls to report difficulty performing daily activities. Our unadjusted persistent arthralgia estimates at 6 (44 percent) and 12 (33 percent) months fall within the pooled estimate from a meta-analysis (40 percent, 95 percent CI 31-49 percent). Consistent with findings in previous studies, case-patients in our study reported a higher prevalence of foot-specific joint pain. Furthermore, a higher proportion of case-patients reported the presence of persistent arthralgia and of more severe arthralgia in the morning; this finding is consistent with those from previous studies reporting a high prevalence of morning stiffness among case-patients. Our results emphasize that, in the USVI, CHIKV illness was associated with persistent arthralgia and difficulty with daily activities one year after disease onset. These findings highlight the need for therapeutic and vaccine research to manage and prevent acute illness and long-term sequelae associated with CHIKV infection. The results also underscore the need for studies to identify risk factors for long-term sequelae of CHIKV illness, to estimate the burden of persistent arthralgia after acute illness, and to understand the effect of persistent arthralgia on quality of life. -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts [Many observational reports have stated that arthralgia resulting from chikungunya virus infection can persist for months or even years. The arthralgia can be so severe as to be incapacitating, adversely affecting the quality of life. The above study provides some quantification of the resulting arthralgia in 165 case patients. Interestingly, a study reported on 17 Feb 2017 found that when the gene for the enzyme granzyme A was missing, chikungunya virus caused far less swelling and arthritis. When the enzyme was inhibited, there was far less swelling and arthritis ( ), indicating a target for treatment. - Mod.TY] ****** [5] Treatment Date: Wed 1 Feb 2017 Source: Science Translational Medicine Vol. 9, Issue 375, DOI: 10.1126/scitranslmed.aah3438 [edited] Jonathan J. Mine,Lindsey E. Cook,, Jun P. Hong, Amber M. Smith1, Justin M. Richner, et al. Therapy with CTLA4-Ig and an antiviral monoclonal antibody controls chikungunya virus arthritis. --------------------------------- Abstract In 2013, chikungunya virus (CHIKV) transmission was documented in the Western Hemisphere, and the virus has since spread throughout the Americas with more than 1.8 million people infected in more than 40 countries. CHIKV targets the joints, resulting in symmetric polyarthritis that clinically mimics rheumatoid arthritis and can endure for months to years. At present, no approved treatment is effective in preventing or controlling CHIKV infection or disease. We treated mice with 8 different disease-modifying antirheumatic drugs and identified CLTA4-Ig (abatacept) and tofacitinib as candidate therapies based on their ability to decrease acute joint swelling. CTLA4-Ig reduced T cell accumulation in the joints of infected animals without affecting viral infection. Whereas monotherapy with CTLA4-Ig or a neutralizing anti-CHIKV human monoclonal antibody provided partial clinical improvement, therapy with both abolished swelling and markedly reduced levels of chemokines, proinflammatory cytokines, and infiltrating leukocytes. Thus, combination CTLA4-Ig and antiviral antibody therapy controls acute CHIKV infection and arthritis and may be a candidate for testing in humans. -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail [One hopes that this treatment is ultimately effective in humans, many of whom suffer incapacitating arthralgia for months. - Mod.TY] ****** [6] Persistent vascular disease Date: Sun 12 Feb 2017 Source: BBC [in Portuguese, trans. Mod.TY, edited] Chikungunya [virus infections] cause irreversible vascular diseases in patients, research shows ------------------------------------- A group of patients participated in an unpublished research project from the University Hospital of the Federal University of Pernambuco (UFPE) that reveals irreversible vascular lesions caused by the disease. Of the 32 patients analyzed with the symptoms, 29 returned to be followed up by the specialists in the study. Of these, 20 repeated the examinations, and it was found that 65 percent maintained the chronic vascular alterations. \"Vascular manifestations in chikungunya [virus infections] were restricted to early stages of the disease. Now, the study shows not only a new manifestation but also its chronicity, since the symptoms persisted for more than 3 months,\" says Catarina Almeida, vascular surgeon responsible for the study. Patients presented with problems such as acute lymphedema (accumulation of fluid in the legs due to blockage of the lymphatic system) and edema in the dorsum of the foot. Lymphatic changes were detected by lymphoscintigraphy. It is still unknown why chronic vascular lesions reach only the lower limbs. \"Our next step now is to do a molecular investigation and understand why this happens, whether it is the patient's exacerbated infection or the direct action of the virus,\" Almeida told the reporter. The researchers further explain that patient morbidity increases with these lesions, and they are more susceptible to infection in the lower limbs. \"In addition, chronic lymphedema has no cure; it's irreversible,\" [Almeida said]. [Byline: Diana Brito] -- Communicated by: Roland H\u00fcbner Superior Health Council Brussels Belgium [A new clinical manifestation of chikungunya virus infection is described in Brazil. It will be interesting to learn whether other clinicians are seeing chronic vascular lesions following acute chikungunya virus infection. - Mod.TY A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  .] [", "SCHMALLENBERG VIRUS - EUROPE (05): UK, ENGLAND, WALES, NORTHERN IRELAND), OVINE, BOVINE *************************************************************************************** A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Sat 10 Jun 2017 Source: Farming Life (Portadown, Northern Ireland) [summarised, edited] As the spring lambing and calving period comes to an end, there have been many reports across the UK of deformed lambs and calves suggestive of in utero infection with Schmallenberg virus (SBV). 1st identified in 2011 in northwest Germany and the Netherlands, this virus causes disease in sheep, cattle and goats. SBV is spread by the _Culicoides_ midges, which are widely present across Europe and move easily between farms and regions allowing rapid and extensive spread of infection. The spread of infection, therefore, occurs predominantly when biting midges are most active between May and October. With mild winter conditions, however, midge activity may extend into November and early December. As of March 2017, the Animal Health and Plant Agency (APHA) has confirmed SBV in lambs on 84 premises in England, 25 in Wales, and in calves on 3 premises in England. Cases have been reported from Cornwall to as far North as Northumberland. In Northern Ireland, antibodies to Schmallenberg virus were detected in the 1st quarter of this year [2017] in 2 calves with skeletal deformities from 2 different herds and a cow from a herd experiencing abortions and calf abnormalities. Whilst an antibody positive does not confirm the involvement of the virus, it provides evidence that this virus is circulating again in Northern Ireland. Other cases in Northern Ireland included a 3-day-old calf born into a dairy herd which was presented for post mortem at AFBI laboratories with a cleft palate and severe limb and spinal deformities; and a term stillborn lamb submitted from a lowland flock in mid-February 2017. At necropsy, severe abnormalities of all 4 limbs of the lamb were noted. There was very little movement in spinal column, and the spinal cord was very narrowed. SBV was considered likely in both cases. Many suspected cases of SBV, however, are not reported and confirmed, meaning we do not know the true extent of the problem. SBV is now considered to be an endemic disease in the UK. Discussion around protection against SBV should, therefore, form part of the flock/herd health planning that farmers do with their vets, who are in an excellent position to know what the SBV situation is within your area, as many of the deformed lambs and calves will need veterinary intervention at lambing or calving. - What are the clinical symptoms of the infection? Infection of non-pregnant sheep and cattle may go unnoticed, but infection of na\u00efve pregnant animals, especially during the most sensitive period, can result in stillbirths or severe deformities of the foetuses and abortion. Sheep are most sensitive between days 28-56 of pregnancy, i.e. during the 2nd month of pregnancy. Cattle are most sensitive between days 70-150 of pregnancy i.e. during the 3rd to 5th month of pregnancy. Other clinical signs in adult cattle include fever, a drop in milk yield, and diarrhoea. With the main risk of transmission of infection being May to October, most at risk are ewes or cows being served in summer and early autumn. For dairy herds, because of the potential production losses in lactating animals, there is clearly a risk throughout the active midge season. - How long does natural immunity last? Following infection, animals become immune, but how long that immunity lasts is unknown, and not all animals in the herd or flock may be infected, meaning some remain naive. Therefore, even where losses are experienced this year [2017], it does not necessarily mean that the herd or flock is not at risk of further losses next year. - How can I protect my animals? Protection against Schmallenberg is through keeping susceptible animals away from the vector (the midge) and vaccination. Research into the use of insecticides against the _Culicoides_ midge species found a deltamethrin-based pour-on treatment to be an effective vector control method. In one study, even hair clipped from the feet of cattle 35 days after standard treatment contained enough deltamethrin to kill midges. Whilst vector control methods are an important part of a Schmallenberg virus control strategy (and will certainly be useful at farm level), by themselves they are unlikely to be successful at controlling disease over a large area because of the behaviour and movements of the midges. Therefore, vaccination alongside an effective insecticide is the most effective way to protect your flock/ herd against SBV. -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts [SBV belongs to the Bunyaviridae family, within the Orthobunyavirus genus. It is a member of the Simbu serogroup viruses, which includes Shamonda, Akabane, and Aino viruses. The Simbu viruses that are most related to SBV are Sathuperi and Douglas virus. As experienced decades back in countries affected by Akabane and Aino viruses, such as Japan, Australia and Israel, the ruminant population remained immune for several years following an episode of the disease. In fact, natural infection of young animals prior to their 1st pregnancy is rather advantageous, rendering them with natural immunity and preventing foetal infection/damage if/when exposed to the virus later during pregnancy. Sheep, due to their relatively short pregnancy (5 months, compared to 9 in cattle) will be the 1st to demonstrate deformed offspring following their exposure to the SBV during pregnancy, earlier than pregnant cows that have been simultaneously exposed to the virus. - Mod.AS ProMED HealthMaps: United Kingdom: England, United Kingdom: Wales, United Kingdom: Northern Ireland: ] [", "CRIMEAN-CONGO HEMORRHAGIC FEVER - PAKISTAN (06): ISLAMABAD ex KHYBER PAKHTUNKHWA ******************************************************************************** A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases [1] Date: Fri 9 Jun 2017 Source: The News International [edited] AK, a patient who was brought to the Pakistan Institute of Medical Sciences (PIMS) for treatment of Hepatitis on [Sun 4 Jun 2017], has been confirmed by the National Institute of Health as suffering from Crimean Congo Hemorrhagic Fever (CCHF). The patient, who comes from Sara-e-Naurang in Khyber-Pakhtunkhwa, is currently under treatment in the isolation ward of medical ward 2 at PIMS, and his condition is reported to have stabilized. He was tested for CCHF in view of symptoms including low blood platelets count. AK is an animal handler. -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail ****** [2] Date: Fri 9 Jun 2017 Source: The Nation [edited] A patient admitted in Pakistan Institute of Medical Sciences (PIMS) has been diagnosed with Congo Virus on [Thu 8 Jun 2017], an official confirmed to The Nation. As per details, the patient is from Khyber Pakthunkhwa and is being kept in isolation ward. Sources informed The Nation that the patient AS was brought at PIMS emergency on [Sun 4 Jun 2017] for the examination of Hepatitis-C. However, witnessing the symptoms of Congo Virus, including bleeding from mouth and low number of blood platelets, the doctors' recommended Congo virus test and National Institute of Health confirmed the status. The patient is kept in isolation ward number 2 and is out of danger reportedly. Sources also added that the doctors and staff who treated the patient are also under monitoring. The patient is also involved in cattle business. Meanwhile, Administrator PIMS Dr Altaf Hussain informed The Nation that the patient belongs to Lakki Marwat and the virus has been confirmed in him. He also said that as per history, one of the relatives of the patient died few weeks back in his village that had the symptoms of Congo virus. Dr Altaf said that patient's report was sent to NIH which confirmed the virus. He also said that medical treatment of the patient has started and he has shown the signs of improvement. \"His situation is better than before,\" he said. Officials at NIH also confirmed the positive report of a patient with Congo Virus. The disease of Congo is contracted from animals to humans though it can lead to death but early preventive measures can enhance the chance of survival. -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail [The report above pertains to one of the cases that were reported from Lakki Marwat district of Khyber Pakhtunkhwa last week [week of 4-10 Jun 2017]. As mentioned in the report above, initially the case was suspected to be Hepatitis C, but clinical presentation prompted investigation for CCHF which was confirmed subsequently. The patient is involved in animal handling and slaughter, which is a high risk group for the disease. - Mod.UBA A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  .] [", "INFLUENZA, CANINE - USA (04): (MULTIPLE STATES) DOG SHOW LINK ************************************************************* A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Wed 7 June 2017 Source: Steve Dale Pet World [edited] H3N2 canine influenza virus outbreak, dog, fatal, 11 states, United States There's an outbreak of dog flu affecting at least 11 states. After inundating Chicago with flu and bouncing around the country in 2015 and 2016, the H3N2 virus, which arrived from Southeast Asia, took a lower profile. But, clearly it never went away. Last month [May 2017], the H3N2 dog flu virus popped up again, and in a big way. The epicenter might have been 2 dog shows. Guesstimates are that 300 or more dogs have been infected with H3N2. Approximately 30 to 40 cases have been confirmed via diagnostic labs. Also, there are several confirmed fatalities. States with confirmed H3N2 are currently Florida, Georgia, Kentucky, Louisiana, Missouri, North Carolina, South Carolina, Tennessee, California, Illinois, and Texas. Some states appear to have only a few sick dogs, while others have many more. Many argue that H3N2 is endemic in the Chicago area, which means it may linger in the environment for a long time. -- Communicated by: Dr Julie Levy University of Florida [In ProMED-mail posting Influenza, canine - USA (03): (NC) dog show link Archive Number: http://promedmail.org/post/20170610.5096162, I predicted we would see a much broader outbreak as those exposed at the show would travel home and expose those animals nearby or that they socialize with. This certainly appears to be the case. We will likely be hearing more about this disease. Please protect your pet. Get it vaccinated. Be cautious of going to doggie social events (dog parks, green ways, etc). Do not share water or water bowls between your pet and some one else's pet. Be cautious of where you take your pet. - Mod.TG A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  .] [", "MALARIA, P. KNOWLESI - MALAYSIA: (SABAH), RISK FACTORS ****************************************************** A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Sat 10 June 2017 Source: The Lancet Planetary Health [edited] Individual-level factors associated with the risk of acquiring human _Plasmodium knowlesi_ malaria in Malaysia: a case-control study. Grigg MJ, Cox J, William T, Jelip J, Fornace KM, Brock PM, von Seidlein L, Barber BE, Anstey NM, Yeo TW, Drakeley CJ. Lancet- planetary-health. Vol 1 June 2017 Summary Background. The emergence of human malaria due to the monkey parasite _Plasmodium knowlesi_ threatens elimination efforts in southeast Asia. Changes in land use are thought to be driving the rise in reported _P. knowlesi_ cases, but the role of individual-level factors is unclear. To address this knowledge gap we assessed human and environmental factors associated with zoonotic [_P. knowlesi_] malaria risk. Methods. We did this population-based case-control study over a 2 year period in the state of Sabah in Malaysia. We enrolled cases with microscopy-positive, PCR-confirmed malaria who presented to 2 primary referral hospitals serving the adjacent districts of Kudat and Kota Marudu. We randomly selected 3 malaria-negative community controls per case, who were matched by village within 2 weeks of case detection. We obtained questionnaire data on demographics, behaviour, and residential malaria risk factors, and we also assessed glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PD) enzyme activity. We used conditional logistic regression models to evaluate exposure risk between _P. knowlesi_ cases and controls, and between _P. knowlesi_ and human-only _Plasmodium_ spp malaria cases. Findings. From [5 Dec 2012], to [30 Jan 2015] we screened 414 patients and subsequently enrolled 229 cases with _P knowlesi_ malaria mono-infection and 91 cases with other _Plasmodium_ spp infection. We enrolled 953 matched controls, including 683 matched to _P knowlesi_ cases and 270 matched to non-_P knowlesi_ cases. Age 15 years or older (adjusted odds ratio [aOR] 4.16, 95 percent CI 2.09-8.29, p [The study was done in Sabah, Malaysia, which has had the highest recorded rates of _P. knowlesi_ infection globally. The study reports significant heterogeneity in co-transmission of _P. knowlesi_ and other _Plasmodium_ species. The results suggest that control strategies against other malaria species than _P. knowlesi_ works have less effect on _P.knowlesi_ infections. This is perhaps expected as _P. knowlesi_ in the only human malaria species with a well-defined animal reservoir, the _Macaca fascicularis_ (the long-tailed or crab-eating macaque) and _M. nemestrina_ (the pig-tailed or Southern pig-tailed macaque). Thus the transmission dynamics is very much different from the human to human transmission of the other 4 human malaria parasites without an animal reservoir, and depend on the proximity of the monkey reservoir to humans. Also, the vector dynamics are not well known and as pointed out in the comments to the paper, the longevity of the vector is not known, and probably the flight range also. The study suggests that exposure during work in fields close to forest or forest fringes is a risk factor, and thus protection could be through insectide impregnated in clothes. It is still not established if human-to-human transmission is an important epidemiological factor. _P. knowlesi_ DNA has been found in mosquitoes co-infected with other _plasmodia_ as well as _P. knowlesi_ gametocyte mRNA in humans (Maeno Y et al. _Plasmodium knowlesi_ and human malaria parasites in Khan Phu, Vietnam: Gametocyte production in humans and frequent co-infection of mosquitoes. Parasitology. 2017 Apr;144(4):527-535. doi: 10.1017/S0031182016002110). This makes it likely that human-to-human transmission can occur, but the difference in the effect of control measures found in the Lancet Planet Health study may indicate that different Anopheles vectors with different habits are involved. - Mod.EP A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  .] [", "CHOLERA, DIARRHEA AND DYSENTERY UPDATE (50): ASIA (YEMEN) ********************************************************* A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Sun 11 Jun 2017 Source: Anadolu Agency [edited] A cholera outbreak has killed at least 859 in war-torn Yemen since late April [2017], according to the WHO. In a Twitter post on [Sun 11 Jun 2017], WHO's Yemen office said over 116 700 suspected cases of cholera have been recorded in 20 provinces across the country since 27 April 2017. The UN agency earlier warned that the 2-year long fighting in Yemen had destroyed the country's health sector, making it difficult to deal with the epidemic. Impoverished Yemen has remained in a state of civil war since 2014, when Houthi rebels overran much of the country, including the capital Sana'a. In 2015, Saudi Arabia and its Arab allies launched a massive air campaign aimed at reversing Houthi military gains and shoring up Yemen's embattled government. [Byline: Ali Oweida] -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail [The statistics of the impressive ongoing epidemic in Yemen in 2017 are: Date (2017) / Cases / Deaths 8 May / 1360 / 25 11 May / 2752 / 51 13 May / 8595 / 115 14 May / 11 000 / 180 17 May / 17 200 / 209 19 May / 23 500 / 242 21 May / 29 300 / 315 22 May / 35 217 / 361 24 May / 42 207 / 420 27 May / 51 832 / 471 30 May / 65 300 / 532 02 Jun / 73 700 / 605 04 Jun / 86 400 / 676 05 Jun / 91 400 / 728 06 Jun / 96 000 / 746 07 Jun / 101 820 / 789 10 Jun / 116 700 / 869. - Mod.LL A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  .] [", "AVIAN INFLUENZA, HUMAN (57): CHINA, H7N9 **************************************** A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases In this Update: [1], [2] Shaanxi Province [3] Shanxi Province [4] Henan Province [5] Shandong Province [6] Hebei Province [7] WHO update ****** [1] Shaanxi Province Date: Wed 7 Jun 2017 17:55:41 Source: Xinhua Net [edited] A man has been confirmed infected with the H7N9 bird flu virus, following the infection of his wife in northwest China's Shaanxi Province, local health authorities said [Wed 7 Jun 2017].` The man, [aged 67 years], is a farmer in neighboring Inner Mongolia Autonomous Region. He tested positive for the virus [Tue 6 Jun 2017] in Yulin city, after days of high fever and coughing at his hometown nearby, the city's disease control center said in a statement. It is the 2nd H7N9 human infection case in the city, the 1st being his 62-year-old wife, who was confirmed with the virus on [Wed 31 May 2017]. Both had been exposed themselves to dead poultry before showing symptoms, the statement said. The couple is being treated in a local hospital in Yulin. H7N9 is a bird flu strain 1st reported to have infected humans in China in March 2013. The World Health Organization has said there is no evidence H7N9 is passed from person to person. -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail [The HealthMap/ProMED map of Shaanxi Province, China can be found at:  . - Mod.MPP ****** [2] Shaanxi Province Date: Wed 7 Jun 2017 11:52 AM Source: FIC (Flu Information Centre/Flu in China) [edited] According to the HFPB of Yulin city, Shaanxi province, a 67-year-old male farmer, (husband of the 1st imported case), resident of Tuke town of Uxin Banner of Ordos city of Inner Mongolia Municipality, confirmed to be the 2nd imported human H7N9 AIV case in Yulin city on [Tue 6 Jun 2017]; The patient had sick/dead poultry contact history prior to the onset of symptoms. The patient and his wife developed symptoms such as cough and fever, and was not improved after treatment in the local clinic. Both patients went to a hospital in Yuyang district of Yulin city for treatment on the afternoon of [Mon 29 May 2017] and were transferred to the city Chinese medicine hospital as suspected human H7N9 case. The Yulin city CDC tested his samples on [Mon 29 May, Sun 4 and Tue 6 Jun 2017] separately. His samples tested positive for H7N9 AIV by Yulin city CDC on [Tue 6 Jun 2017] .The patient is now receiving treatment and quarantine in the hospital. -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail --- [3] Shanxi Province Date: Sat 10 Jun 2017 10:43 AM Source: FIC (Flu Information Centre/Flu in China) [edited] According to the HFPC of Shanxi province, Datong city reported one exported human H7N9 case on [Mon 5 Jun 2017]. The 55-year-old female patient, resident of Datong county of Datong city, was confirmed to be human H7N9 AIV case by Beijing CDC on [Mon 5 Jun 2017] He remained in the designated hospital for treatment and quarantine. [Note, the gender of this patient is not clear from the report as the report says \"55-year-old female..\" but then says \"He remained...\". - Mod.MPP] -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail [The HealthMap/ProMED map of Shanxi Province can be found at:  . - Mod.MPP] ****** [4] Henan Province Date: Fri 9 Jun 2017 17:32 PM Source: FIC (Flu Information Centre/Flu in China) [edited] Henan province reported 2 human H7N9 AIV cases (one in Nanyang city, one in Zhoukou city) between [3 - 9 Jun 2017]. The 48-year-old male patient, is a resident of Tanghe county of Nanyang city. He was in serious condition and remained in hospital for treatment. The 41-year-old male patient, a resident of Dancheng county of Zhoukou city, was in serious condition and remained in hospital for treatment. -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail [The HealthMap/ProMED map of Henan Province, China can be found at:  . - Mod.MPP] ****** [5] Shandong Province Date: 10 Jun 2017 Source: FIC (Flu Information Centre/Flu in China) [edited] [The HealthMap/ProMED map of Shandong province, China can be found at:  . - Mod.MPP] ****** [6] Hebei Province Date: Sat 10 Jun 2017 13:57 PM Source: FIC (Flu Information Centre/Flu in China) [edited]  . During the period between [2 to 8 Jun 2017], the Hebei province reported one human H7N9 AIV case. The case (a 16-year-old male) was reported in Cangzhou city (exported to Beijing). -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail [The HealthMap/ProMED map of Hebei Province, China can be found at:  . - Mod.MPP] ****** [7] WHO update Date: Thu 8 Jun 2017 Source: WHO Disease outbreak news [edited] On [Fri 19 May 2017], the National Health and Family Planning Commission of China (NHFPC) notified WHO of 17 additional laboratory-confirmed cases of human infection with avian influenza A(H7N9) virus in China. On [Fri 26 May 2017], the NHFPC notified WHO of 9 additional laboratory-confirmed cases of human infection with avian influenza A(H7N9) virus in China. Details of the case patients On [Fri 19 May 2017], the NHFPC reported a total of 17 human cases of infection with avian influenza A(H7N9) virus. Onset dates of the cases ranged from [29 Apr 2017] to 13 May 2017. Of these 17 case patients, 6 were female. The median age was 56 years (range 30 to 84 years). The case patients were reported from Anhui (1), Beijing (1), Chongqing (1), Hebei (6), Hunan (1), Jiangsu (1), Shaanxi (1), Shanxi (1), Shandong (2), Sichuan (1), Zhejiang (1). This is the 1st case reported in Shanxi. At the time of notification, there were 2 deaths, 15 case patients were diagnosed as having either pneumonia (6) or severe pneumonia (9). Sixteen case patients were reported to have had exposure to poultry or live poultry market, and one had no known poultry exposure. No case clustering was reported. On [Fri 26 May 2017], the NHFPC reported 9 human cases of infection with avian influenza A(H7N9) virus. Onset dates ranged from 7 to 24 May 2017. All 9 case patients were male. The median age was 63 years (range 36 to 74 years). The case patients were reported from Beijing (1), Hebei (1), Jiangsu (1), Shanxi (1), Shandong (1), Sichuan (3), Zhejiang (1). At the time of notification, there were no deaths, 9 cases were diagnosed as having either pneumonia (2) or severe pneumonia (7). Eight cases were reported to have had exposure to poultry or live poultry market, and one had no known poultry exposure. No case clustering was reported. Public health response The Chinese governments at national and local levels are taking further measures which include:  - Continuing to guide the provinces to strengthen assessment, and prevention and control measures.  - Continuing to strengthen control measures focusing on hygienic management of live poultry markets and cross-regional transportation.  - Conducting detailed source investigations to inform effective prevention and control measures.  - Continuing to detect and treat human infections with avian influenza A(H7N9) early to reduce mortality.  - Continuing to carry out risk communication and issue information notices to provide the public with guidance on self-protection.  - Strengthening virology surveillance to better understand levels of virus contamination in the environment as well as mutations, in order to provide further guidance for prevention and control. WHO risk assessment The number of human infections with avian influenza A(H7N9) and the geographical distribution in the 5th epidemic wave (i.e. onset since 1 October 2016) is greater than earlier waves. This suggests that the virus is spreading, and emphasizes that further intensive surveillance and control measures in both human and animal health sector are crucial. Most human cases are exposed to avian influenza A(H7N9) virus through contact with infected poultry or contaminated environments, including live poultry markets. Since the virus continues to be detected in animals and environments, and live poultry vending continues, further human cases can be expected. Although small clusters of cases of human infection with avian influenza A(H7N9) virus have been reported including those involving patients in the same ward, current epidemiological and virological evidence suggests that this virus has not acquired the ability of sustained transmission among humans. Therefore the likelihood of further community level spread is considered low. Close analysis of the epidemiological situation and further characterization of the most recent viruses are critical to assess associated risk and to adjust risk management measures in a timely manner. WHO advice WHO advises that travellers to countries with known outbreaks of avian influenza should avoid, if possible, poultry farms, contact with animals in live poultry markets, entering areas where poultry may be slaughtered, or contact with any surfaces that appear to be contaminated with faeces from poultry or other animals. Travellers should also wash their hands often with soap and water, and follow good food safety and good food hygiene practices. WHO does not advise special screening at points of entry with regard to this event, nor does it currently recommend any travel or trade restrictions. As always, a diagnosis of infection with an avian influenza virus should be considered in individuals who develop severe acute respiratory symptoms while travelling in or soon after returning from an area where avian influenza is a concern. WHO encourages countries to continue strengthening influenza surveillance, including surveillance for severe acute respiratory infections (SARI) and influenza-like illness (ILI) and to carefully review any unusual patterns, ensure reporting of human infections under the IHR 2005, and continue national health preparedness actions. -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail [The novel virus needs intensive surveillance and monitoring as the 5th wave has shown that the virus is evolving in birds and its transmission efficiency in humans may change as well. - Mod.UBA] [", "ANTIBIOTIC RESISTANCE (06): DENMARK, MRSA, ASYLUM SEEKERS ********************************************************* A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Fri 9 Jun 2017 8:47 am Source: CPH Post [edited] A new report from the State Serum Institute (SSI) has revealed that Denmark saw the highest ever number of cases involving the antibiotic-resistant bacteria MRSA last year [2016]. The report showed there were 3550 new cases in 2016 - a considerable jump from the 2973 instances that occurred in 2015. According to SSI, asylum-seekers accounted for part of the increase. \"MRSA among asylum-seekers was calculated in 2015 and 2016, as they often come from areas with a high MRSA prevalence and are only offered PRSA [?Penicillin resistant staph aureus] treatment in Denmark if logistical conditions permit it,\" SSI wrote. \"One part of the observed increase among asylum-seekers is due to a changed and more thorough registration practice and screening activity. It is recommended that asylum-seekers who are living or have lived in an asylum centre within the last 6 months are checked for MRSA at the hospital.\" The report also showed that there continues to be a very low prevalence of MRSA cases stemming from the hospital industry, which indicates that the national MRSA guidelines are working according to intentions. The number of people who were infected during a hospital visit was at just 43 last year [2016], compared to 40 in 2015. Furthermore, the SSI figures found there was a small increase in the number of cases involving MRSA in farm animals (the so-called CC398 bacteria) - up to 1249 from 1173 in 2015. -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts [According to the European Union (EU), migrants and asylum seekers entered the EU in record numbers since the summer of 2015. In 2015, over 2.6 million people arrived in Europe from non-EU countries. Most are men and about 30 percent were from Syria. Most (about 1 million) entered Germany in 2015 with a population of about 81 million; 37 100 entered Denmark with a population of about 5.7 million, and 82 800 entered the Netherlands with a population of about 16.9 million, having been born in non-EU countries ( ). Migrants might bring infectious diseases that are endemic in their countries of origins to the EU, the risk being dependent on the incidence in their country of origin. For example, the incidence of TB ranges as low as 17 new cases per 100 000 population in the Syrian Arab Republic to 338 in Nigeria; the average TB rate in the European Region is 39 per 100 000 population ( ). Outbreaks of scabies and louse-borne relapsing fever in migrants in the EU have been reported by ProMED-mail in the past, attributable to the poor living conditions in migrant camps. (see also's below). The risk for importation of Middle East respiratory syndrome (MERS) is low, but WHO has noted that \"the MERS outbreak in the Republic of Korea demonstrates that this possibility cannot be excluded\" ( ). The WHO in this article also noted a risk for importation of viral hepatitis, vector-borne diseases such as malaria and leishmaniasis, and antimicrobial resistance. In fact, similar to the news report above from Denmark, a high prevalence of MRSA and ESBL was recently reported among asylum seekers in the Netherlands, a EU country with a low prevalence of multidrug-resistant organisms compared to other countries in Europe (1). The abstract is reproduced below: \"Migration is one of the risk factors for the spread of multidrug-resistant organisms (MDRO). The increasing influx of migrants challenges local health care systems. To provide evidence for both hospital hygiene measure and empirical antibiotic therapy, we analysed all cultures performed in asylum seekers between January 1st 2014 and December 31st 2015 for methicillin resistant _Staphylococcus aureus_ (MRSA) and for multidrug-resistant Enterobacteriaceae (MDRE). We compared these with cultures from the Dutch patient population with risk factors for carriage of MDRO. A total of 7181 patients were screened for MRSA. 7357 _S. aureus_ were isolated in clinical cultures. Of 898 screened asylum seekers, almost 10 percent were MRSA positive. Of 118 asylum seekers with _S. aureus_ in clinical cultures almost 19 percent were MRSA positive. The general patient population had a 1.3 percent rate of MRSA in _S. aureus_ isolates. A higher rate of Panton-Valentine leukocidin (PVL) positive strains (RR: 2.4; 95 percent CI: 1.6-3.4) was found in asylum seekers compared to the general patient population. In 33 475 patients one or more Enterobacteriaceae were obtained. More than 21 percent of the asylum seekers were carrier of MDRE, most of them producing extended spectrum beta-lactamases (20.3 percent). 5.1 percent of the general patient population was MDRE carrier. It can be concluded that asylum seekers present with higher rate of MDRO compared to the general patient population. These results justify continued screening of asylum seekers to anticipate multidrug-resistant organisms during hospital care of patients.\" 1. Ravensbergen SJ, Berends M, Stienstra Y, Ott A. High prevalence of MRSA and ESBL among asylum seekers in the Netherlands. PLOS One Published: April 25, 2017.  . - Mod.ML A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  .] [", "NEW IN INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF INFECTIOUS DISEASES (06): JUNE 2017 ******************************************************************* A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: June 2017 Source: IJID [edited] IJID is the official journal of the International Society for Infectious Diseases, ProMED-mail's parent organization. The journal is peer-reviewed and open access. Papers are available to view and download at no charge to readers. Editorials Evaluation of the notifiable diseases surveillance system in South Africa B.V. Girdler-Brown International Journal of Infectious Diseases, Volume 59, June 2017, Pages 139-140  . New optimism to the use of clinical scoring systems for the diagnosis of child tuberculosis - even among HIV co-infected Mette Holm, Christian Wejse International Journal of Infectious Diseases, Volume 59, June 2017, Pages 148-149  . Review Humanized chimeric mouse models of hepatitis B virus infection Suwan Sun, Jun Li International Journal of Infectious Diseases, Volume 59, June 2017, Pages 131-136  . Original Reports Clinical features and treatment of patients with Vibrio vulnificus infection Wei Yu, Xiaomin Shen, Hongying Pan, Tingting Xiao, Ping Shen, Yonghong Xiao International Journal of Infectious Diseases, Volume 59, June 2017, Pages 1-6  . Geographic disparities in pneumonia-specific under-5 mortality rates in Mainland China from 1996 to 2015: a population-based study Leni Kang, Chunhua He, Lei Miao, Juan Liang, Jun Zhu, Xiaohong Li, Qi Li, Yanping Wang International Journal of Infectious Diseases, Volume 59, June 2017, Pages 7-13  . Implementation of an antibiotic checklist increased appropriate antibiotic use in the hospital on Aruba Frederike Vera van Daalen, Anouk Lagerburg, Jaclyn de Kort, Elena S\u00e0nchez Rivas, Suzanne Eugenie Geerlings International Journal of Infectious Diseases, Volume 59, June 2017, Pages 14-21  . IL-7\u03b45 protein is expressed in human tissues and induces expression of the oxidized low density lipoprotein receptor 1 (OLR1) in CD14+ monocytes Lalit Rane, Sayma Rahman, Isabelle Magalhaes, Aditya Ambati, Jan Andersson, Alimuddin Zumla, Susanna Brighenti, Markus J. Maeurer International Journal of Infectious Diseases, Volume 59, June 2017, Pages 29-36  . Antigen-specific CTLs: to produce autologous cells product for adoptive cellular therapy Sai Liu, Yi Shao, Jie Xu, Na Jiang, Yanchao Dai, Yu Wang, Huanqing Sun, Jianping Sun, Yonghong Zhang International Journal of Infectious Diseases, Volume 59, June 2017, Pages 37-43  . Novel mutations in gyrA and parC among Shigella sonnei strains from Jiangsu Province of China, 2002-2011 Bing Gu, Ting-ting Qin, Wen-ting Fan, Ru-ru Bi, Ying Chen, Ying Li, Ping Ma International Journal of Infectious Diseases, Volume 59, June 2017, Pages 44-49  . Diagnostic accuracy of routine blood examinations and CSF lactate level for post-neurosurgical bacterial meningitis Yang Zhang, Xiong Xiao, Junting Zhang, Zhixian Gao, Nan Ji, Liwei Zhang International Journal of Infectious Diseases, Volume 59, June 2017, Pages 50-54  . The performance of the TBAg/PHA ratio in the diagnosis of active TB disease in immunocompromised patients Munyemana Jean Bosco, Hongyan Hou, Lie Mao, Xiaohui Wu, Kreeti Devi Ramroop, Yanfang Lu, Liyan Mao, Yu Zhou, Ziyong Sun, Feng Wang International Journal of Infectious Diseases, Volume 59, June 2017, Pages 55-60  . Are antibiotic-resistant pathogens more common in subsequent episodes of diabetic foot infection? Dan Lebowitz, Karim Gariani, Benjamin Kressmann, Elodie von Dach, Benedikt Huttner, Placido Bartolone, Nam L\u00ea, Morad Mohamad, Benjamin A. Lipsky, Ilker U\u00e7kay International Journal of Infectious Diseases, Volume 59, June 2017, Pages 61-64  . Evaluation of the eazyplex MRSA assay for the rapid detection of Staphylococcus aureus in pleural and synovial fluid D. Henares, P. Brotons, X. Buyse, I. Latorre, H.D. de Paz, C. Mu\u00f1oz-Almagro International Journal of Infectious Diseases, Volume 59, June 2017, Pages 65-68  . A prospective, comparative study of severe neurological and uncomplicated hand, foot and mouth forms of paediatric enterovirus 71 infections Yoann Crabol, Polidy Pean, Channa Mey, Veasna Duong, Beat Richner, Denis Laurent, Ky Santy, Heng Sothy, Philippe Dussart, Arnaud Tarantola, Philippe Buchy, Paul F. Horwood International Journal of Infectious Diseases, Volume 59, June 2017, Pages 69-76  . The clinical significance of neutrophilic pleocytosis in cerebrospinal fluid in patients with viral central nervous system infections Siraya Jaijakul, Lucrecia Salazar, Susan H. Wootton, Elizabeth Aguilera, Rodrigo Hasbun International Journal of Infectious Diseases, Volume 59, June 2017, Pages 77-81  . Receipt of thyroid hormone deficiency treatment and risk of herpes zoster Shao-Chung V. Hsia, Lie Hong Chen, Hung-Fu Tseng International Journal of Infectious Diseases, Volume 59, June 2017, Pages 90-95  . Utility of urine lipoarabinomannan (LAM) in diagnosing tuberculosis and predicting mortality with and without HIV: prospective TB cohort from the Thailand Big City TB Research Network Gompol Suwanpimolkul, Kamon Kawkitinarong, Weerawat Manosuthi, Jiratchaya Sophonphan, Sivaporn Gatechompol, Pirapon June Ohata, Sasiwimol Ubolyam, Thatri Iampornsin, Pairaj Katerattanakul, Anchalee Avihingsanon, Kiat Ruxrungtham International Journal of Infectious Diseases, Volume 59, June 2017, Pages 96-102  . Prevalence, molecular epidemiology and intra-hospital acquisition of Klebsiella pneumoniae strains producing carbapenemases in an Italian teaching hospital from January 2015 to September 2016 Andrea Bartolini, Monica Basso, Elisa Franchin, Nicola Menegotto, Anna Ferrari, Ettore De Canale, Samantha Andreis, Renzo Scaggiante, Stefania Stefani, Giorgio Pal\u00f9, Saverio Giuseppe Parisi International Journal of Infectious Diseases, Volume 59, June 2017, Pages 103-109  . Inhibition of the PI3K-Akt-mTOR signaling pathway in T lymphocytes in patients with active tuberculosis XueXuan Zhang, TengYi Huang, Ying Wu, WenGuang Peng, HanBin Xie, MeiChen Pan, HuanBin Zhou, BoZhi Cai, YingE Wu International Journal of Infectious Diseases, Volume 59, June 2017, Pages 110-117  . Clinical efficacy of ceftazidime/avibactam versus other active agents for the treatment of bacteremia due to carbapenemase-producing Enterobacteriaceae in hematologic patients Juan J. Cast\u00f3n, Isabel Lacort-Peralta, Pilar Mart\u00edn-D\u00e1vila, Bel\u00e9n Loeches, Salvador Tabares, Liz Temkin, Juli\u00e1n Torre-Cisneros, Jos\u00e9 R. Pa\u00f1o-Pardo International Journal of Infectious Diseases, Volume 59, June 2017, Pages 118-123  . Hepatic expression of cannabinoid receptors CB1 and CB2 correlate with fibrogenesis in patients with chronic hepatitis B Erhei Dai, Lianshan Zhang, Lihong Ye, Shiqing Wan, Lulu Feng, Qi Qi, Fang Yao, Zhen Li International Journal of Infectious Diseases, Volume 59, June 2017, Pages 124-130  . Comparing laboratory surveillance with the notifiable diseases surveillance system in South Africa F.G. Benson, A. Musekiwa, L. Blumberg, L.C. Rispel International Journal of Infectious Diseases, Volume 59, June 2017, Pages 141-147 . A comparison of tuberculosis diagnostic systems in a retrospective cohort of HIV-infected children in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil Solange Gon\u00e7alves David, Kathryn L. Lovero, Maria de F\u00e1tima B. Pombo March, Thalita G. Abreu, Antonio Ruffino Netto, Afranio L. Kritski, Clemax C. Sant'Anna International Journal of Infectious Diseases, Volume 59, June 2017, Pages 150-155  . Case Reports First report of human parechovirus type 3 infection in a pregnant woman Makiko Shinomoto, Tatsuya Kawasaki, Takuya Sugahara, Keiko Nakata, Tomoya Kotani, Hidetaka Yoshitake, Kento Yuasa, Masashi Saeki, Yasuhiro Fujiwara International Journal of Infectious Diseases, Volume 59, June 2017, Pages 22-24  . Adjuvant interferon-gamma immunotherapy in a patient with progressive cerebral Nocardia abscesses Jenneke Leentjens, Mark S. Gresnigt, Frank L. van de Veerdonk, Matthijs Kox, Bart Jan Kullberg, Peter Pickkers, Annemarie E. Brouwer, Mihai G. Netea International Journal of Infectious Diseases, Volume 59, June 2017, Pages 25-28  . Probable pulmonary Blastomyomycocis in an immunocompetent person Dan Zhu, Hui Chen, Long Yu International Journal of Infectious Diseases, Volume 59, June 2017, Pages 86-89  . Medical Imagery A 34-Year-Old Obese Woman with Rash, Finger Swelling and Fever Na Huo, Zhao Wu, Xiaoqin Dong, Li Feng, Lin Nong, He Wang, Hong Zhao International Journal of Infectious Diseases, Volume 59, June 2017, Pages 82-85  . Breast abscess due to Bacillus Calmette-Gu\u00e9rin Aur\u00e9lien Dinh, Clara Duran, Benjamin Davido, Ruxandra Calin, Anne-Laure Roux, J\u00e9r\u00f4me Salomon International Journal of Infectious Diseases, Volume 59, June 2017, Pages 137-138  . -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail [", "TULAREMIA - USA (05): (MINNESOTA) FELINE EXPOSURE ************************************************* A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Sat 10 Jun 2017 04:41PM CDT Source: KMSP [edited] It's a rare disease in Minnesota, with only 3 reported human cases in 2016, but Minnesota Department of Health warns cases of tularemia could be on the rise. \"It's still uncommon, but over the last several years we are starting to see more and more cases,\" said Kirk Smith with the Minnesota Department of Health. Last week [week of 28 May-3 Jun 2017], health officials reported the 1st tularemia case of 2017 in Burnsville after an infected cat passed the bacterium to a person. The disease can be transmitted by infected animals, wood ticks, deer flies and contaminated water or soil. Cats are a common transmitter to humans, typically contracting the disease from a squirrel or rabbit. Squirrels and rabbits usually getting the disease from infected wood ticks, which is where the bacteria often originates \"As the years go on here it's become more common in animals and the environment and consequently in humans as well,\" said Smith. Symptoms of tularemia can include ulcers or sores at the sight of the infection, swollen lymph nodes, high fever and body aches. Tularemia is fatal in up to 5 percent of cases, but treatment with antibacterial therapy normally results in a full recovery. [Byline: Jack Highberger] -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail [_F. tularensis_ can be recovered from contaminated water, soil, and vegetation as it can persist for weeks under ideal environmental conditions. _F. tularensis_ also can be found in amoebas (such as, _Acanthamoeba_), which can become airborne in some settings, and may represent a significant environmental reservoir for this bacterium. Humans can become incidentally infected through diverse environmental exposures: bites by infected ticks and deerflies; contact with infectious animal tissues or fluids; direct contact with or ingestion of contaminated food, water, or soil; and inhalation of infective aerosols. In one case, bacteria were aerosolized from the fur of a dog as it shook itself off after entering a home. Finally, there are several reports of tularemia in humans following bites from infected domestic cats. It is highly infectious, with as few as 10 organisms needed to cause disease. Humans can develop severe and sometimes fatal illness, but do not transmit the disease to others. The typical incubation period is 3 to 5 days, with a range of one to 14 days. The clinical presentation of tularemia depends on the route of exposure. Airborne _F. tularensis_ would mainly cause pleuropneumonitis. Exposures that penetrate broken skin result in ulceroglandular or glandular disease. The onset of tularemia is usually abrupt, with fever, headache, chills and rigors, generalized body aches (often prominent in the low back), coryza, and sore throat. Nausea, vomiting, and diarrhea may occur. Sweats, fever, chills, progressive weakness, malaise, anorexia, and weight loss characterize the continuing illness. - Mod.LL A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  .] [", "MERS-COV (37): SAUDI ARABIA (RIYADH), NOSOCOMIAL TRANSMISSION, FATAL ******************************************************************** A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases In this update: [1] Saudi Arabia, 6 newly confirmed cases/infections - MOH 10-11 Jun 2017 [2] Saudi Arabia - media report ****** [1] Saudi Arabia, 6 newly confirmed cases/infections - MOH 10-11 Jun 2017 Date: Sun 11 Jun 2017 Source: Saudi MOH 10-11 Jun 2017 [edited] As of 14:00 [2:00 PM] today [Sun 11 Jun 2017], there have been a total of: 1654 laboratory-confirmed cases of MERS-CoV infection, including 669 deaths [reported case fatality rate 40.4 percent], 943 recoveries, and 42 currently active cases/infections. [As previously mentioned, the numbers of deaths, recoveries and currently active cases come from my spreadsheet tallies and differ from those listed on the Saudi MOH website; my spreadsheet counts asymptomatic infections. - Mod.MPP] Since the last ProMED-mail update [Fri 9 Jun 2017], there have been a total of: 6 newly confirmed cases/infections [including 3 asymptomatic infections in contacts] 1 newly reported fatality, and 0 newly reported recoveries. Information on newly confirmed cases (6 cases/infections) Date: Sun 11 Jun 2017 (5 cases/infections)  - all expat healthcare workers  - all from Riyadh  - all classified as secondary healthcare acquired cases in healthcare workers 1 - A 35-year-old male, currently in stable condition, identified as an asymptomatic contact of previously confirmed MERS-CoV infected individual. 2 - A 57-year-old male currently in stable condition. 3 - A 42-year-old female currently in stable condition. 4 - A 54-year-old female currently in stable condition, identified as an asymptomatic contact of previously confirmed MERS-CoV infected individual. 5 - A 39-year-old male currently in stable condition, identified as an asymptomatic contact of previously confirmed MERS-CoV infected individual. Date: Sat 10 Jun 2017 - 1 newly confirmed fatal case  - A 32-year-old Saudi male noted to have died at the time of initial confirmation report. History of pre-existing co-morbidities. Classified as a secondary healthcare acquired case in a patient. -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail Saudi Arabia registered 35 Middle East Respiratory Syndrome (MERS) corona virus cases in 15 days, of which 28 developed the infection at health facilities, officials said on Sunday [11 Jun 2017]. Although the MERS corona virus cases are not anymore considered a high health risk like before, the infection could be fatal for those with poor health or chronic diseases, Xinhua news agency reported. The country has registered 1577 cases since 2012, including 672 deaths. [As stated in [1] above, the numbers I have been citing come from a spreadsheet I have maintained and includes asymptomatic contacts found to be infected with the MERS-CoV. - Mod.MPP] Infection control consultant Mohammed Abdulrahman highlighted the need for more awareness on infection control measures at health facilities as most of the new cases could have been prevented. He urged the elderly to avoid visiting patients at hospitals or be directly associated with camels which are the main source of the virus, because of their weak immune systems. -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail [The nosocomial outbreak(s) in Riyadh continue. Over the past 2 days there have been 6 newly confirmed MERS-CoV infections in Riyadh. All 6 were classified as secondary healthcare acquired cases with one in a patient and the remaining 5 in healthcare workers. All of the healthcare workers were listed as expatriates, while the affected patient was a Saudi nationality. Of these 6 cases, 1 involved a fatality (the case in a patient), 2 were reported to be stable condition and 3 were reported to be asymptomatic individuals identified through contact tracing. We do not have more details on the actual number of healthcare facilities involved with nosocomial transmission at this time, nor do we know the division of the cases/infections reported to date by healthcare facility. That being said, since the beginning of May 2017 there have been a total of 44 newly confirmed MERS-CoV infections in Riyadh of whom 30 (68.2 percent) were reported to have been asymptomatic contacts of other known MERS-CoV infected individuals. Five of the 44 cases were classified as primary cases with an additional case not as yet classified, and only one case had a history of direct contact with camels. Two of the cases were in household contacts and the remaining 36 cases were classified as secondary healthcare acquired cases with 10 occurring in patients, and 26 occurring in healthcare workers. Of note, 4 of the 44 (9 percent) were reported to have died, 5 (11 percent) were reported to have recovered, and the remaining 35 are still active cases with outcome information still pending. We do not know if any of the reported \"asymptomatic\" infected individuals have gone on to have clinical disease consistent with MERS-CoV infection. Note that I've included the media report on this increase in reported cases/infections with MERS-CoV as an indication of the concern the country is experiencing as 35 cases reported in 15 days is a significant departure from the previous \"trickle\" of reported cases. We await further details on this outbreak (or these outbreaks). The HealthMap/ProMED-mail map of Saudi Arabia can be found at:  . - Mod.MPP] [", "HANTAVIRUS - EUROPE (02): GERMANY (BADEN-W\u00dcTTENBERG) ***************************************************** A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Sat 10 Jun 2017 Source: Outbreak News Today [edited] Health officials in Baden-W\u00fcrttemberg state in southwest Germany are reporting an increase in hantavirus cases this year, especially since March 2017, according to a Stuttgarter-Nachrichten report. A total of 441 hantavirus cases have been reported to date, which is higher than in the past 4 years. Rodents like the R\u00f6telmaus [bank vole, _Myodes glareolus_], carry the hantavirus in itself, the report notes. Through contact with infected animals or their feces and urine excretions, the viruses enter the human organism. According to the state health authority, the Swabian Alb, the Albvorland, the Neckarg\u00e4u and Tauber plateaus, as well as Odenwald and Oberschwaben, have the highest rates of disease. Landesgesundheitsamt, or the National Health Office say those at most risk include those cleaning cellars and roofs, forestry workers and gardeners. [Byline: Robert Herriman] -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts [Although not stated in the above report, the hantavirus most likely involved in these cases is Puumala virus, with the bank vole (_Myodes glareolus_) as the rodent reservoir host. Puumala virus is endemic to south western and western Germany. The Puumala virus (PUUV) outbreaks in the past have been related to increases in the bank vole population. The vole population increases are due in large part to increases in beech tree mast (tree seeds) abundance, with PUUV outbreaks occurring a year after peak mast production. Bank voles are widely distributed across Europe. An image of _Myodes glareolus_, the Puumala virus host, can be accessed at  . - Mod.TY A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  .] [", "ANTHRAX - PAKISTAN (02): (FEDERALLY ADMINISTERED TRIBAL AREAS) LIVESTOCK VACCINATED *********************************************************************************** A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Sat 10 Jun 2017 Source: The Express Tribune [edited] The political administration and Livestock Department, FATA [Federally Administered Tribal Areas] taking notice of a suspected anthrax outbreak in Toda Cheena area of central Kurram Agency dispatched a team of vaccinators to the affected area. Livestock Department Assistant Director Fazle Elahi said a 2-member team of veterinary doctors visited the area on [Thu 8 Jun 2017] and provided vaccine and other medicines to afflicted cattle, a private news channel reported.on [Fri 9 Jun 2017]. The doctors said the cattle [died] due to anthrax disease and the vaccination would control the disease. \"We visited the affected area and administered vaccine to the cattle. We are hopeful that the disease will be controlled after vaccination,\" Dr Daud, a member of the team said. Locals thanked the Livestock Department for sending the team. Earlier it was reported that at least 40 cows and goats had died last week [week of 28 May - 3 Jun 2017] in the area due to anthrax. Anthrax is a serious, usually fatal disease caused by the bacterium _Bacillus anthracis_. It occurs world-wide and can infect a wide range of domestic and wild animal species as well as humans. -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail [Excellent. As vaccination can take 6-8 days to kick in, it is necessary to check one's livestock at least twice a day for any animals developing a temperature. Any such animals should be treated with a long acting antibiotic, and revaccinated 10-15 days later. Maps of Pakistan can be seen at  and  . - Mod.MHJ A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  .] [", "FOODBORNE ILLNESS - JAPAN (04): (IBARAKI) SCHOOL STUDENTS, MILK *************************************************************** A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases [1] Date: Sat 10 Jun 2017 Source: Summary of 3 articles in Japanese [edited] NHK (Japan Broadcasting Corporation) news  and Nikkei According to the news updated on the issue on 8 Jun 2017, Ibaraki Prefecture revised the number of those affected from 3333 to 3193 children, teachers, and school staff, who noticed unusual odor or taste the milk provided. Some addressed it was chlorine-like odor or somewhat washy than usual to have nausea or diarrhea. Among them, 639 (updated from 377) had noticed to feel unwell and 2 had been referred to the hospital, having symptoms of nausea or abdominal pain. However, all of their symptoms were mild and already discharged. Those affected are the children of 60 primary and junior high schools and 1 special school in the areas of 8 cities including Mito, Kitaibaraki, Hitachinaka, Hitachiomiya, Naka, Tsuchiura, Hitachi, and Ibaraki city. The suspected milk was provided in 200 ml/packets, widely to 298 schools in 16 cities and towns in Ibaraki Prefecture. Since the event occurred, Mito City Health Center in Ibaraki Prefecture has been investigating the causative agents and reasons/factors behind the incident since 5 Jun 2017, having assessed overall production process and storage and logistics conditions; however, there are no evidences to indicate what exactly caused this incident. The investigation continues further and in-depth in order to provide the updates, to be announced officially on 12 Jun 2017. -- Communicated by: EpiCore Global Surveillance Project ****** [2] Date: Sat 10 Jun 2017 Source: Summary of 2 articles in Japanese [edited] NHK (Japan Broadcasting Corporation) news  and Medical Tribune, Yomiuri Newspaper report Follow up reports so far available as of 11 Jun 2017 were that 639 students and teachers of a total of 61 primary and junior high schools in 8 cities and towns of Ibaraki prefecture, complained of feeling unwell; an additional 3193 felt uncomfortable with the milk they consumed on 5 Jun 2017, according to NHK news and Yomiuri Newspaper ( and  .). The news did not mention any particular coordinated event involving the schools. The symptoms the news mentioned were diarrhea and vomiting. Of the symptomatic persons, 2 sought medical care at health facilities, however they were not serious (Yomiuri Newspaper). The milk was provided in a 200 ML carton made of laminated paper. According to NHK news, the Ibaraki Health Department has investigated the event, including the milk itself provided to the schools, inspections to the provider of the milk, and the storage of the milk, however, so far any possible cause of the bad smell of the milk has not been identified. According to the NHK news, the official final announcement by the prefectural government will be available on about 12 Jun 2017. On 5 Jun 2017, the weather in Mito was clear and sunny with the highest temperature 21.3 deg C (70. 34 deg F) and the humidity 47-52 percent at noon time. -- Communicated by: Dr Masaki Ota Research Institute of Tuberculosis, Tokyo, Japan [We appreciate the EpiCore Surveillance Project members providing an update on the sick children and the milk. It seems unusual the milk would have an odor, possibly of a chlorine-like substance. Sour milk can be distasteful but chlorine would be quite distasteful and possibly harmful. However the 1st summary states teachers and staff also noticed the unusual odor. Vomiting and hysteria can spread through a group of students, but the addition of the diarrhea is not usually present in a hysteria event. Furthermore, with adults noticing the unusual odor, it seems there may be more than just a hysteria situation. - Mod.TG Maps of Japan can be seen at  and  . - Sr.Tech.Ed.MJ A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  .] [", "ZIKA VIRUS (12): AMERICAS, ASIA, RESEARCH, OBSERVATIONS ******************************************************* A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases In this update: [1] Cases in various countries: Americas Americas cumulative case numbers Cases in various countries not mentioned above or more recent case numbers. Caribbean --- Puerto Rico South America --- Peru - National - Piura region Asia --- Singapore Imported cases with little or no possibility of ongoing mosquito transmission --- USA - Case numbers mainland - Territories and Commonwealth [2] USA: Pregnancy outcomes [3] Zika detection in semen [4] Vaccine protects testes [5] Dual Zika and chikungunya virus transmission [6] NS1 vaccine ****** [1] Cases in various countries Americas --- Americas cumulative case numbers As of 8 Jun 2017 Country / Locally acquired: suspected / Confirmed [conf] / Imported / Deaths / Conf Congenital Syndrome North America: Bermuda / 0 / 0 / 6 / 0 / 0 Canada / 0 / 0 / 507 / 0 / 1 USA / 0 / 225 / 5015 / 0 / 80 Latin America: Mexico / 0 / 8785 / 15 / 0 / 5 Central American Isthmus: Belize / 1294 / 206 / 0 / 0 / 0 Costa Rica / 6415 / 1818 / 32 / 0 / 5 El Salvador / 11 531 / 51 / 0 / 0 / 4 Guatemala / 3678 / 921 / 0 / 0 / 140 Honduras / 32 130 / 302 / 0 / 0 / 4 Nicaragua / 0 / 2060 / 3 / 0 / 2 Panama / 4178 / 969 / 42 / 0 / 8 Latin Caribbean: Cuba / 0 / 187 / 58 / 0 / 0 Dominican Republic / 4906 / 345 / 0 / 0 / 93 French Guiana / 10 385 / 483 / 10 / 0 / 17 Guadeloupe / 30 845 / 382 / 0 / 0 / 18 Haiti / 2955 / 5 / 0 / 0 / 1 Martinique / 36 680 / 21 / 0 / 0 / 23 Puerto Rico / 0 / 40 330 / 137 / 5 / 38 Saint Barthelemy / 990 / 61 / 0 / 0 / 0 Saint Martin / 3280 / 200 / 0 / 0 / 1 Non-Latin Caribbean: Anguilla / 30 / 23 / 1 / 0 / 0 Antigua and Barbuda / 465 / 14 / 2 / 0 / 0 Aruba / 1208 / 468 / 7 / 0 / 0 Bahamas / 0 / 25 / 3 / 0 / 0 Barbados / 705 / 150 / 0 / 0 / 1 Bonaire, St Eustatius and Saba / 235 / 381 / 0 / 0 / 0 Caymans / 232 / 31 / 10 / 0 / 0 Curacao / 2589 / 1259 / 0 / 0 / 0 Dominica / 1154 / 79 / 0 / 0 / 0 Grenada / 335 / 118 / 0 / 0 / 2 Guyana / 0 / 37 / 0 / 0 / 0 Jamaica / 7650 / 203 / 0 / 0 / 0 Montserrat / 18 / 5 / 0 / 0 / 0 Saint Kits and Nevis / 554 / 33 / 0 / 0 / 0 Saint Lucia / 822 / 50 / 0 / 0 / 0 Saint Vincent and the Grenadines / 508 / 83 / 0 / 0 / 0 Sint Maarten / 247 / 147 / 0 / 0 / 0 Suriname / 2768 / 723 / 0 / 4 / 4 Trinidad and Tobago / 0 / 718 / 1 / 0 / 3 Turks and Caicos / 200 / 25 / 3 / 0 / 0 Virgin Islands (UK) / 74 / 53 / 0 / 0 / 0 Virgin Islands (USA) / 1115 / 1017 / 2 / 0 / 0 Andean Area: Bolivia / 1767 / 585 / 4 / 0 / 14 Colombia / 98 135 / 9802 / 0 / 0 / 159 Ecuador / 3842 / 1694 / 15 / 0 / 3 Peru / 5653 / 1109 / 22 / 0 / 0 Venezuela / 59 965 / 2413 / 0 / 0 / 0 [Brazil and] Southern Cone: Brazil / 224 670 / 134 057 / 0 / 11 / 2722 Argentina / 869 / 101 / 40 / 0 / 2 Chile / 0 / 0 / 34 / 0 / 0 Paraguay / 672 / 16 / 0 / 0 / 2 Uruguay / 0 / 0 / 1 / 0 / 0 Totals, Americas / 565 749 / 212 770 / 5970 / 20 / 3352 [Maps showing the location of the affected islands and countries in the Americas mentioned above and below can be accessed at  ; North America at ; Central America ; Caribbean , and South America at . - Mod.TY] Cases in various countries not mentioned above or more recent case numbers. Caribbean --- Puerto Rico. 5 Jun 2017. (conf) since the beginning of the outbreak as of 20 May 2017, 40 000 cases with 38 related birth defects. Outbreak declared over with about 10 cases reported in every 4-week period since mid-April [2017], down from more than 8000 cases in 4-week periods at the same time last year [2016]. South America --- Peru - National. 6 Jun 2017. (reported) 391 cases). District and region most affected: Comas, Lima (conf) 26 cases. [in Spanish] [This report was posted on ProMED-ESP ( ) and sent in by Kathryn Soderholm ( ). - Mod.TY] - Piura region. 3 Jun 2017. (conf) 1st locally acquired case. [in Spanish] Asia --- Singapore. 11 Jun 2017. (conf) 2 new cases [total case numbers for 2017 not given]. [Maps of Singapore can be accessed at and . - Mod.TY] Imported cases with little or no possibility of ongoing mosquito transmission --- USA - case numbers mainland. Zika virus disease in the United States, 1 Jan 2017-7 Jun 2017 State / Symptomatic cases / Viremic blood donors Alabama / 3 / 0 Alaska / 1 / 0 Arizona / 1 / 0 Arkansas / 0 / 0 California / 14 / 1 Colorado / 3 / 0 Connecticut / 0 / 0 Delaware / 0 / 0 District of Columbia / 0 / 0 Florida / 15 / 3 Georgia / 1 / 0 Hawaii / 1 / 0 Idaho / 0 / 0 Illinois / 4 / 0 Indiana / 1 / 0 Iowa / 1 / 0 Kansas / 2 / 0 Kentucky / 1 / 0 Louisiana / 1 / 0 Maine / 1 / 0 Maryland / 3 / 0 Massachusetts / 5 / 0 Michigan / 6 / 0 Minnesota / 0 / 0 Mississippi / 2 / 0 Missouri / 1 / 0 Montana / 0 / 0 Nebraska / 1 / 0 Nevada / 0 / 0 New Hampshire / 0 / 0 New Jersey / 2 / 0 New Mexico / 0 / 0 New York / 24 / 1 North Carolina / 3 / 0 North Dakota / 0 / 0 Ohio / 3 / 0 Oklahoma / 0 / 0 Oregon / 1 / 0 Pennsylvania / 3 / 0 Rhode Island / 2 / 0 South Carolina / 0 / 0 South Dakota / 0 / 0 Tennessee / 0 / 0 Texas / 10 / 1 Utah / 0 / 0 Vermont / 2 / 0 Virginia / 3 / 0 Washington / 2 / 0 West Virginia / 0 / 1 Wisconsin / 2 / 0 Wyoming / 0 / 0 Totals / 125 / 7 - Territories and Commonwealth with the possibility of ongoing transmission: Symptomatic / Blood donors American Samoa / 3 / 0 Puerto Rico / 462 / 3 US Virgin Islands / 37 / 0 Total / 502 / 3 [A map of the USA showing the states and territories mentioned above can be accessed at and Roland H\u00fcbner Superior Health Council Brussels Belgium ****** [2] USA: Pregnancy outcomes Date: Thu 8 Jun 2017 Source: CDC. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 2017; 66 [edited] ref: Shapiro-Mendoza CK, Rice ME, Galang RR, et al: Pregnancy outcomes after maternal Zika virus infection during pregnancy -- US Territories, 1 Jan 2016- 25 Apr 2017. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 2017; doi: ---------------------------------------------------------------------- Summary ------- What is already known about this topic? Zika virus infection during pregnancy causes serious brain abnormalities and/or microcephaly and has been associated with other severe birth defects. Local transmission of Zika virus was reported in U.S. territories in 2016. What is added by this report? Overall, about 5 percent of fetuses and infants born to women with laboratory evidence of recent possible Zika virus infection in the U.S. territories had possible Zika-associated birth defects, the same as the percentage reported in the 50 U.S. states during 2016. Possible Zika-associated birth defects including brain abnormalities and/or microcephaly were reported following Zika virus infection during every trimester of pregnancy. Among completed pregnancies with positive nucleic acid tests confirming Zika virus infection identified in the 1st, 2nd, and 3rd trimesters, the percentages of fetuses or infants with possible Zika-associated birth defects was 8, 5, and 4 percent, respectively. What are the implications for public health practice? Current data suggest that Zika virus infection during any trimester of pregnancy might result in Zika-associated birth defects. Identification and follow-up of infants born to women with laboratory evidence of recent possible Zika virus infection during pregnancy can facilitate timely and appropriate clinical intervention services and assessment of future needs. Information about adherence to the recommended newborn testing and screening can improve monitoring and care of infants affected by Zika. -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail [The risks of teratogenic effects when Zika virus infection occurs during any phase of pregnancy are real. Pregnant women should avoid exposure whether by mosquito bite in areas of active virus transmission or from unprotected sexual contact with men who have been in those localities. - Mod.TY] ****** [3] Zika detection in semen Date: Sun 4 Jun 2017 12:12 CDT Source: American Society for Microbiology [edited] Research presented at ASM Microbe 2017 by experts at the Fertility and Cryogenics Lab shows a reliable clinical assay that can detect the Zika virus from semen samples. \"This assay can help reduce Zika infection rates and allow couples who are identified at risk due to travel or geographic location plan their pregnancy,\" said lead author Hisham Greiss MD, PhD, HCLD [High-complexity Clinical Laboratory Director] at the Fertility and Cryogenics Lab.  A total of 100 semen samples were spiked with a recombinant Accuplex ZIKV (SeraCare Life Sciences) at 5 viral copies per ml and processed in Aptima Urine Transport medium (Hologic Inc.) and tested using Aptima\u00ae ZIKV assay released under the FDA's emergency use authorization on the fully automated Panther system from Hologic, Inc. The samples were also tested for West Nile virus, Chagas and dengue, recombinant dengue virus, recombinant chikungunya virus, human papilloma virus, herpes simplex virus 1, herpes simplex virus 2, _Chlamydia_, and gonorrhea. The experiment was repeated 3 times and in triplicates each time. The assay was found to be 100 percent sensitive and 100 percent specific to ZIKV RNA from semen samples with a limit of detection of 5 viral copies per mL of semen. Zika fever symptoms are often misdiagnosed due to its nonspecific clinical symptoms, so an accurate diagnosis is of paramount importance for management of the disease and to prevent neonatal infections. Zika infection during pregnancy can also cause serious birth defects and is associated with other pregnancy problems. -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail Rapporteur Mary Marshall [A fast, sensitive and specific test for the presence of Zika virus in semen will be useful for testing semen of men who have been in areas of Zika virus transmission and for sperm banks. The abstract for this 4 Jun 2017 presentation at the ASM meeting is available at  . This citation was provided by Roland H\u00fcbner. - Mod.TY] ****** [4] Vaccine protects testes Date: Wed 7 Jun 2017 Source: Nature Communications [edited] ref: Griffin BD, Muthumani K, Warner BM, et al: DNA vaccination protects mice against Zika virus-induced damage to the testes. Nat Commun. 2017 Jun 7;8:15743. doi: 10.1038/ncomms15743 ---------------------------------------------------------------------- Abstract -------- Zika virus (ZIKV) is an emerging pathogen causally associated with serious sequelae in fetuses, inducing fetal microcephaly and other neurodevelopment defects. ZIKV is primarily transmitted by mosquitoes, but can persist in human semen and sperm, and sexual transmission has been documented. Moreover, exposure of type-I interferon knockout mice to ZIKV results in severe damage to the testes, epididymis, and sperm. Candidate ZIKV vaccines have shown protective efficacy in preclinical studies carried out in animal models, and several vaccines have entered clinical trials. Here, we report that administration of a synthetic DNA vaccine encoding ZIKV pre-membrane and envelope (prME) completely protects mice against ZIKV-associated damage to the testes and sperm and prevents viral persistence in the testes following challenge with a contemporary strain of ZIKV. These data suggest that DNA vaccination merits further investigation as a potential means to reduce ZIKV persistence in the male reproductive tract. -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail Rapporteur Mary Marshall [It will be interesting to see the results when the vaccine has completed tests in non-human primates. - Mod.TY] ****** [5] Dual Zika and chikungunya virus transmission Date: Thu 1 Jun 2017 Source: PLoS Neglected Tropical Diseases [edited] ref: G\u00f6ertz GP, Vogels CBF, Geertsema C, et al: Mosquito co-infection with Zika and chikungunya virus allows simultaneous transmission without affecting vector competence of _Aedes aegypti_. PLoS Negl Trop Dis. 2017 Jun 1;11(6):e0005654. doi: 10.1371/journal.pntd.0005654 ---------------------------------------------------------------------- Abstract -------- Background. Zika virus (ZIKV) and chikungunya virus (CHIKV) are highly pathogenic arthropod-borne viruses that are currently a serious health burden in the Americas, and elsewhere in the world. ZIKV and CHIKV co-circulate in the same geographical regions and are mainly transmitted by _Aedes aegypti_ mosquitoes. There is a growing number of case reports of ZIKV and CHIKV co-infections in humans, but it is uncertain whether co-infection occurs via single or multiple mosquito bites. Here we investigate the potential of _Ae. aegypti_ mosquitoes to transmit both ZIKV and CHIKV in one bite, and we assess the consequences of co-infection on vector competence Methodology/principal findings. 1st, growth curves indicated that co-infection with CHIKV negatively affects ZIKV production in mammalian, but not in mosquito cells. Next, _Ae. aegypti_ mosquitoes were infected with ZIKV, CHIKV, or co-infected via an infectious blood meal or intrathoracic injections. Infection and transmission rates, as well as viral titers of positive mosquitoes, were determined at 14 days after blood meal or 7 days after injection. Saliva and bodies of (co-)infected mosquitoes were scored concurrently for the presence of ZIKV and/or CHIKV using a dual-colour immunofluorescence assay. The results show that orally exposed _Ae. aegypti_ mosquitoes are highly competent, with transmission rates of up to 73 percent for ZIKV, 21 percent for CHIKV, and 12 percent of mosquitoes transmitting both viruses in one bite. However, simultaneous oral exposure to both viruses did not change infection and transmission rates compared to exposure to a single virus. Intrathoracic injections indicate that the selected strain of _Ae. aegypti_ has a strong salivary gland barrier for CHIKV, but a less profound barrier for ZIKV. Conclusions/significance. This study shows that _Ae. aegypti_ can transmit both ZIKV and CHIKV via a single bite. Furthermore, co-infection of ZIKV and CHIKV does not influence the vector competence of _Ae. aegypti_. Author summary -------------- Zika virus (ZIKV) and chikungunya virus (CHIKV) are highly pathogenic arthropod-borne viruses that present a serious health threat to humans. Since 2015, both viruses circulate in the same geographical regions of the Americas and are predominantly transmitted by the yellow fever mosquito _Ae. aegypti_. There is a growing number of case reports of ZIKV and CHIKV co-infections in humans, but it is uncertain whether co-infection occurred via single or multiple mosquito bites. Therefore, we infected _Ae. aegypti_ mosquitoes via an infectious blood meal with ZIKV, CHIKV, or both and scored the saliva of (co-)infected mosquitoes 14 days post infection for the presence of ZIKV, CHIKV or both. _Ae. aegypti_ was competent for both viruses with transmission rates up to 73 percent (ZIKV) and 21 percent (CHIKV). A substantial proportion of mosquitoes became saliva-positive for both viruses (12 percent), suggesting that _Ae. aegypti_ can transmit both CHIKV and ZIKV via a single bite. Additionally, co-infections did not influence the infection or transmission rates of either ZIKV or CHIKV. Our results indicate that co-infection of CHIKV and ZIKV can lead to simultaneous transmission by the same mosquito in the field. -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail Rapporteur Mary Marshall [George Robertson (grobertson@path.org>) also sent in this report, and is thanked. - Mod.TY] ****** [6] NS1 vaccine Date: Sun 4 Jun 2017 Source: American Society for Microbiology [edited] Research presented by Farshad Guirakhoo, PhD, Chief Scientific Officer, GeoVax, Inc, at the ASM Microbe 2017 meeting showed a new Zika virus vaccine that gives 100 percent protection in mice. The vaccine is the 1st to be based on the Zika virus NS1 protein, and the 1st to show single-dose protection against Zika in an immunocompetent lethal mouse challenge model. Results of the study were presented on [4 Jun 2017] at the American Society for Microbiology (ASM) Microbe conference in New Orleans [1-5 Jun 2017]. In the presented study, outbred immunocompetent mice were exposed to a lethal challenge dose of Zika virus delivered directly into the brain. \"A single dose of GeoVax's NS1 vaccine candidate protected 100 percent of vaccinated animals,\" said Guirakhoo. In contrast, 80-90 percent of sham-immunized control animals died within 7-10 days. Because the NS1 antigen is not presented on the surface of the virus, it was chosen as the target immunogen for the vaccine to avoid a potential risk of disease enhancement when vaccines are developed based on Zika virus envelope proteins. This antibody dependent enhancement (ADE) of infection phenomena has been shown between Zika virus and a related flavivirus, dengue, in both in vitro and in vivo studies. An NS1-based vaccine could also limit or block transmission of Zika virus in its mosquito vector. The NS1 protein is abundantly produced by flaviviruses in infected hosts and is picked up together with the virus after the mosquito takes a blood meal from humans. The NS1 proteins interfere with the innate immune system of the mosquito, evolved to fight foreign pathogens, allowing the flavivirus to replicate and disseminate in mosquitoes. Therefore, said Guirakhoo, \"a vaccine that can induce effective antibodies to NS1 and disable its function has the potential to reduce growth and transmission of Zika virus in its mosquito vector. This could enhance vaccine effectiveness in endemic areas by blocking the virus transmission from infected individuals to other members of the community.\" -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail [This approach to NS-1 antigen selection for a vaccine, to avoid the risk of ADE, is interesting. Presumably, the next steps will be to test the vaccine in non-human primates and in vector mosquitoes. - Mod.TY] [", "UNDIAGNOSED DISEASE, TARO - SAMOA ********************************* A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases [1] Date: Wed 7 Jun 2017 Source: Radio New Zealand [edited] The American Samoa Department of Agriculture has suspended importing of all taro and taro shoots from Samoa. The director, Filifaatali Mike Fuiava, said that he received information of an unknown virus breakout in Samoa affecting taro crops in the islands of Upolu and Savai'i. The disease is such that the taro shoot looks mature but when uprooted, the taro tuber itself has rotted away. He said he had to take every precautionary measure to make sure this unknown virus would not enter American Samoa. He did not want to experience another epidemic like the taro leaf blight of 1993-1994. Lifting the suspension would depend on test results. -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail ****** [2] Date: Fri 12 May 2017 Source: Radio New Zealand [edited] A potential hurdle has emerged for Samoa's taro crop recovery from leaf blight fungus with a new unknown virus found in seedlings. A ban has been put on the transporting of taro shoots from Upolu to Savai'i while the crop division of the Ministry of Agriculture investigates plantations affected on Upolu. Tolo Iosefa of the Pacific Community [SPC] said samples have been sent to Germany for testing. \"Even if it is known from the first that it is a new strain or a virus, I don't see it as a problem,\" he said. \"Taro production is now coming back.\" -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail [Cultivated taro is classified as _Colocasia esculenta_ (family Araceae), but the species is considered to be polymorphic with several variants grown in different regions. It is an important tropical crop worldwide and a staple food in many poor areas. Corms are used for starch, but processing is required due to the presence of oxalates, and leaves can be eaten as a vegetable. Other crops in the family include giant swamp taro (_Cyrtosperma_ species) in the Pacific and dasheen (_Xanthosoma_ species) in southern America. These crops are often regarded as a food \"bank\" since they can continue to grow in the ground for many years and be available when other crops may have failed. Leaf blight (as mentioned above), caused by the fungus-like organism _Phytophthora colocasiae_, is one of the most important diseases of the crop in the Pacific region. It can destroy entire leaves in 10-20 days, leading to reduced photosynthesis, loss of plant vigour and serious yield losses. The disease was first reported in Java in the early 1900s and is now present in various parts of Asia and the Pacific. Varying levels of disease intensity in different areas have led to the suggestion that different strains of the pathogen may exist, in addition to differences in susceptibility of local crop varieties. Disease management using an integrated approach has been successful in the Pacific, including cultural methods (such as crop rotation, intercropping), fungicides as sprays or treatments for seed tubers, phytosanitation, and use of cultivars with reduced levels of susceptibility. Programmes specific to different areas for the assessment of taro blight resistance levels of local cultivars have been set up by some countries (ProMED-mail post http://promedmail.org/post/20101216.4451), including Samoa, where new resistant varieties are being used in the recovery of the national taro production. A major outbreak of taro leaf blight occurred in Samoa in 1993 (referred to above in item 1). The new disease reported here is speculatively called a 'virus'. However, serious problems of taro due to several fungal, viral and bacterial pathogens have been reported from Oceania (for examples see ProMED-mail post http://promedmail.org/post/20100514.1572) as well as Asia and Africa. Until molecular diagnosis of the samples that were sent off is completed, an viral cause is only one of the possibilities. The optimistic statement in item 2 that this new disease will not affect national taro production may not be justified and appears rather baffling. Maps Samoa: and Oceania overview: Pictures Symptoms of some taro diseases via: Taro leaf blight symptoms: and Links Information on major taro diseases:  ,  ,  ,  , and Taro leaf blight: (with pictures),  , and SPC: - Mod.DHA] [", "HEPATITIS E - INDIA: (JAMMU AND KASHMIR) CONTAMINATED WATER *********************************************************** A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Mon 12 Jun 2017 Source: Kashmir Observer [edited] The doctors have confirmed an outbreak of hepatitis E at Ahmadabad village of south Kashmir's Kulgam district, due to the supply of highly contaminated water to the inhabitants. 5 people in the village have so far been tested positive for the infection. \"As soon as we received the reports of jaundice cases in the village Ahmadabad we deputed a medical team,\" said Block Medical Officer (BMO), DH Pora Dr Zahoor Ahmad. He said 8 people were found to have jaundice and their blood samples were taken for testing to Integrated Disease Surveillance Program (IDSP) laboratory in Barzulla Srinagar. \"Out of 8, 5 have so far tested positive for [hepatitis E] infection while the reports of other suspected cases is awaited,\" said Dr Zahoor. He said that the medical teams have been stationed in the allopathic dispensary in the village and they were monitoring the situation. Doctors attribute the consumption of highly contaminated water by the villagers as the reason for the outbreak. \"We also took 3 water samples for testing and the reports of samples is awaited,\" said BMO. He said that the people need not to panic but only consume boiled water and maintain proper hygiene. [Byline: Sameer Ahmad] -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail [Hepatitis E is found worldwide, and different genotypes of the hepatitis E virus determine differences in epidemiology. For example, genotype 1 is usually seen in developing countries and causes community-level outbreaks, while genotype 3 is usually seen in the developed countries is zoonotic and does not generally cause outbreaks. Globally, 57 000 deaths and 3.4 million cases of acute hepatitis E are attributable to infection with hepatitis E virus genotypes 1 and 2. The highest seroprevalence rates (number of persons in a population who test positive for the disease) are observed in regions where low standards of sanitation increase the risk for transmission of the virus. Over 60 percent of all hepatitis E infections and 65 percent of all hepatitis E deaths occur in East and South Asia, where seroprevalence rates of 25 percent are common in some age groups. In Egypt, half the population older than 5 years is serologically positive for the hepatitis E virus ( .) - Mod.LL Maps of India can be seen at  and  . - Mod.LL] [", "UNDIAGNOSED ILLNESS - UK: (SCOTLAND) FATAL ****************************************** A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Sun 11 Jun 2017 Source: BBC News, Glasgow & West Scotland [edited] A police investigation is under way after a 14-year-old girl died and 2 teenagers were taken to hospital after falling ill. The young girl died at Dundasvale Court in the Cowcaddens area of Glasgow. Officers are investigating the cause of her death, which is being treated as \"unexplained\". Police said a boy and a girl, both aged 15, also fell ill and they are being treated at the Queen Elizabeth University Hospital. It is understood that drugs are 1 of the lines of inquiry. A police spokeswoman said they received a report of the girl's death at 00:45 on [Sun 11 Jun 2017]. She added: \"A police investigation is ongoing into the cause of the death and illnesses and inquiries are continuing.\" -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts [There is not enough detail to determine the cause of death and illness. Drugs, in particular illicit drugs are always a concern, especially when one or more person's are involved. - Mod.TG A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  .] [", "CHOLERA, DIARRHEA AND DYSENTERY UPDATE (51): ASIA (YEMEN) ********************************************************* A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Mon 12 Jun 2017 06:13:16 CST Source: Xinhua News Agency [edited] The death toll from cholera in war-torn Yemen has increased to 923 since 27 Apr 2017, with the total suspected cases passing 124 000, the WHO said on [Mon 12 Jun 2017]. The death toll from cholera epidemic rose to 923 until late [Mon 12 Jun 2017], up from 789 reported on [Thu 8 Jun 2017], which means that 134 Yemeni people have been killed by the spreading epidemic in the past 4 days, according to WHO data. The number of suspected cholera cases has increased up to 124 002 reported from 20 out of 22 Yemeni governorates, up from 101 820 on [Thu 8 Jun 2017], with an increase of 22 182, according to WHO. Last week, the United Nations Children's Fund (UNICEF) expected suspected cases could hit 130 000 in 2 weeks, while in May 2017 WHO expected they could reach 300 000 in the next 6 months. The outbreak has spread fast in 20 governorates in just 6 weeks, since [27 Apr 2017]. Yemen is facing total collapse as the war continues. 2/3 of the population, around 19 million, need some humanitarian or protection aid. About 10.3 million people are close to famine and 14.5 million people lack access to safe drinking water and sanitation. Less than 45 percent of the country's hospitals are operational at the moment, but even those operational ones are coping with huge challenges, on top of which is the lack of medications, medical equipment, and staffs. The blockade on Yemen, part of a Saudi-led bombing campaign launched in March 2015, has deepened the crisis in the country which used to import most of its basic needs. And there is another problem: not much aid is given to address the crisis, especially cholera outbreak. -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail [The statistics of the impressive ongoing epidemic in Yemen in 2017 are: Date (2017) / Cases / Deaths 8 May / 1360 / 25 11 May / 2752 / 51 13 May / 8595 / 115 14 May / 11 000 / 180 17 May / 17 200 / 209 19 May / 23 500 / 242 21 May / 29 300 / 315 22 May / 35 217 / 361 24 May / 42 207 / 420 27 May / 51 832 / 471 30 May / 65 300 / 532 2 Jun / 73 700 / 605 4 Jun / 86 400 / 676 5 Jun / 91 400 / 728 6 Jun / 96 000 / 746 7 Jun / 101 820 / 789 10 Jun / 116 700 / 869 12 Jun / 124 002 / 923 - Mod.LL A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  .] [", "FOODBORNE ILLNESS - IRAQ: (NINEVEH) INTERNALLY DISPLACED PERSONS CAMP, FATAL, REQUEST FOR INFORMATION ***************************************************************************************************** A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Tue 13 Jun 2017 14:30 BST Source: BBC NEWS [edited] Hundreds of people have fallen ill and a child has died of suspected food poisoning at a camp for displaced people near the Iraqi city of Mosul [Nineveh province]. People were said to be vomiting and suffering dehydration after an iftar meal, to break the daily Ramadan fast. The Hasansham U2 camp, between Mosul and Irbil, houses people displaced by an Iraqi offensive to capture Mosul from so-called Islamic State (IS). IS fighters are currently under heavy siege in the west of the city. The UN refugee agency, UNHCR, said in a statement that around 800 cases had been recorded, 200 of whom were taken to hospital. One woman receiving treatment told the agency: \"We felt stomach pains as soon as we ate. We felt we couldn't breathe and then saw that our neighbors were all suffering at the same time.\" Unconfirmed reports say a 2nd person, a woman, has died. The UNHCR said it was \"extremely concerned\" by the events at the camp. \"Staff have been working closely overnight to co-ordinate the response with other agencies and the relevant authorities... to ensure that those who have fallen ill were able to receive swift medical treatment and that the seriously sick were provided transport to nearby hospitals,\" the statement said. The food, containing beans, chicken, and yoghurt, was prepared in a restaurant in Irbil and brought to the camp by a Qatari charity, Rudaw news agency added. It quoted camp supervisor Rizgar Obed as saying that outside organisations had previously been banned from bringing in food, but the camp authorities had been forced \"under great pressure\" to change the regulations. The camp is one of 13 built by the UNHCR in the Mosul area to cope with people fleeing from the city and surrounding villages. It currently houses 6235 people. More than 800 000 people -- about 1/3 of the pre-war population of Mosul -- have been displaced since October 2016, 633 000 of them from the west of the city. -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail [With an incubation period of seemingly minutes, the possible etiology of the illness here is quite limited and may not be a bacterial-produced toxin. ProMED would like more information regarding these illnesses. It is possible that laboratory testing will show a food item to be contaminated with high levels of _Staphylococcus aureus_. Food can become contaminated if a person with a staph infection has an uncovered lesion or sore that comes in contact with food or food processing equipment. _Staphylococcus aureus_ bacteria and toxin can contaminate foods or equipment. Staphylococcal enterotoxins are fast acting, sometimes causing illness in as little as 30 minutes but usually in 4-6 hours, with nausea, vomiting, stomach cramps, and little if any fever or diarrhea. The patients usually recover within a day. When occurring in a population that is malnourished and already somewhat dehydrated, mortality may occur. A very short incubation of a vomiting-associated illness (less than 1 hour) suggests that the etiology was heavy metal ingestion. A number of metals can cause this type of syndrome, which is usually caused by the ingestion of a liquid that had been kept in a metallic container. These metals include antimony, copper, tin, and zinc. The illnesses are usually self-limiting and require only symptomatic care. In addition to vomiting, other clues may include the liquid being described as having a metallic taste. Identifying the specific cause requires analysis of the food or liquid vehicle. Some potential differences in the illnesses exist between causes include a longer incubation period (several hours) for zinc, vomiting and diarrhea for tin, and blue or green vomitus for copper. It is also possible that a chemical poisoning occurred in this large episode. - Mod.LL A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  .] [", "SCRUB TYPHUS - NEPAL (04): (MORANG, SANKHUWASABHA) ************************************************** A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Mon 12 Jun 2017 Source: EpiCore Global Surveillance Project [edited] I would like to inform [ProMED-mail] that 2 scrub typhus cases [have been] diagnosed at BP Koirala Institute of Health Sciences (BPKIHS), Dharan, Nepal Case 1: a 12-year old male, in Morang district [Province One] Case 2: a 5-year old female, in Sankhuwasabha district [Province One] Lab diagnosis confirmation: ELISA method -- Communicated by: EpiCore Surveillance Project member Dr Arun Kumar Singh \u200ePediatrician & Neonatologist (BPKIHS) and Kamal Ranabhat, MPH EpiCore Global Surveillance Project member Department of Community Medicine & Public Health Institute of Medicine (IOM) Tribhuvan University (TU) Kirtipur, Kathmandu Nepal [ProMED-mail thanks Dr Arun Kumar Singh and Kamal Ranabhat for this submission. There have been prior reports on scrub typhus cases in Nepal earlier this year (2017) and last year (see also's below). Scrub typhus is transmitted by the bite of a 6-legged chigger, the larval form of the trombiculid family of 8-legged mites. Chiggers are most active during warmer summer months ( ). Chiggers live in shaded grassy areas and tend to be more abundant during rainy spells because they need a high-level of humidity in order to survive. During the heat of the afternoon or during long dry spells, they may retreat toward the moist soil. Once chiggers have fed on humans, they drop off of their host and transform into nymphs, which then develop into adult mites that feed on plant material and are harmless to humans. Morang District is a mostly rural southern part of Province One, in the eastern region of Nepal with a lower tropical climate ( ). Sankhuwasabha District is in the northern part of Province One, ( ). For a map of Nepal's provinces and districts, see  . - Mod.ML A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  .] [", "HEPATITIS A - USA (08): (CALIFORNIA) FATAL, REQUEST FOR INFORMATION ******************************************************************* A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Mon 12 Jun 2017 5:41 PM PDT Source: NBC 7 San Diego [edited] A 4th person has died as a result of a hepatitis A outbreak in San Diego County, the San Diego County Health and Human Services Agency (HHSA) said Mon 12 Jun 2017. Since the outbreak, 120 people have been hospitalized and there have been 160 total cases of the virus in the county. According to the HHSA, the outbreak has not been linked to a common food, drink or drug source. But many of the individuals who became sick from the virus are homeless and/or used illegal drugs. There were 12 reported cases of the virus in county detention facilities. The following is a list of possible exposures. - George Bailey Detention Facility: Area 1A: from [10-24 Apr 2017] Area 2A: from [17 May-5 Jun 2017] Area 3A: on [24 Apr 2017] Area 3C: from [24 Apr-1 May 2017], on [5 May 2017], and from [15-18 May 2017] - San Diego Central Jail Area 4A: from [8-10 May 2017] Area 7B: from [24 Apr-26 May 2017] Area 8C: from [24 Apr-7 May 2017] - East Mesa Detention Facility from [6-8 May 2017] Anyone who may have been exposed to the virus can develop symptoms up to 50 days after the exposure. \"We strongly encourage people who are at risk to check with their healthcare providers and get vaccinated for hepatitis A,\" said public health officer Wilma Wooten, MD, MPH. The virus can be prevented if a vaccine is received within 2 weeks of the exposure, according to the HHSA. Those most at risk for getting hepatitis A are those in the homeless community, illegal drug users, and people with chronic liver diseases. The vaccine is also recommended for anyone who frequently works with homeless people and/or illegal drug users. Hepatitis A can also be spread by having sexual contact or sharing drugs with someone who is infected. Symptoms of hepatitis A include: jaundice (yellowing of the skin and eyes), fever, fatigue, loss of appetite, nausea, vomiting, abdominal pain, dark urine, and light-colored stools. Hepatitis A can sometimes cause liver failure and even death. [Byline: Jaspreet Kaur] -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail [The number of cases of diagnosed hepatitis A in San Diego County in southern California continues to increase, now over a 6.5 month period. Date / Cases / Hospitalized (percentage) / Deaths (percentage) -------------------------------------------------------------- 5 Apr 2017 / 39 / 33 (85) / 1 (3) 4 May 2017 / 80 / 66 (83) / 3 (4) 31 May 2017 / 133 / 103 (80) / 3 (2) 12 Jun 2017 / 160 / 120 (75) / 4 (2.5) There have been 80 more cases over about 6 weeks and 121 more cases over 10 weeks. Since many cases of HAV infection are asymptomatic or anicteric (without jaundice), the total number of cases is likely to been significantly higher. It remains unclear if the persistent increase is related to slow reporting, increased awareness and testing, secondary cases, or the persistent source or sources in the environment. An epidemiologic curve showing dates of onset over time would be useful in sorting out the possibilities. The very high hospitalization rate may be related to the homelessness of the cohort but could represent a more virulent strain. HAV infection occurred in some individuals chronically infected with either hepatitis B or C, but it is not clear if the fatalities occurred in those individuals. Homelessness and illicit substance use seem to be relevant risk factors while homosexual practices is not. It remains unclear how and from what vehicle the virus is spreading. - Mod.LL The state of California can be located on the HealthMap/ProMED-mail interactive map at . San Diego County can be seen on the map at  . - Sr.Tech.Ed.MJ] [", "HEPATITIS E - NIGER (05): (DIFFA) FATAL, PREGNANT WOMEN ******************************************************* A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Sat 3 Jun 2017 Source: Terra, Chile [in Spanish, trans., edited] The epidemic of hepatitis E reported in April 2017 in the Diffa region in southeastern Niger has left 33 deaths out of a total of 766 cases of this disease, representing a mortality rate of 4.3 percent. The figures were communicated today, 3 Jun 2017, in the latest report of the UN Office of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA), which points out that the main focus of the epidemic is in the city of Diffa, capital of the province of the same name, where there are 230 cases. Women are particularly affected, accounting for 61 percent of cases compared to 39 percent of men [see updated numbers from UN OCHA in the comment below]. In order to fight against the epidemic, Diffa health workers and workers of humanitarian agencies carry out constant prevention campaigns, particularly hygiene habits, and improvement of access points to drinking water and sanitation systems. In the refugee camps (mostly Nigerian), which are plentiful in the Diffa region, drums of 20 liters of drinking water are being distributed and latrines and lavatories are being built to reduce the risk of contagion linked to human promiscuity, explained a humanitarian agent in Diffa. -- Communicated by: ProMED-ESP [The UN Office of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) report on the hepatitis E epidemic in Diffa region of Niger (in French, available at  ) indicates that as of 3 Jun 2017, 800 cases including 33 deaths had been reported. Of these, 308 cases (38 percent) and 1 death (a 12-year-old boy) were reported among men and 492 cases (62 percent) and 32 deaths among women. Maps of Niger can be seen at and . Although not stated in this post, much of the mortality in hepatitis E occurs in woman in the 2nd and 3rd trimesters of pregnancy. The following regarding hepatitis E virus infection during pregnancy is extracted from: Chaudhry SA, Verma N, Koren G: Hepatitis E infection during pregnancy. Can Fam Physician. 2015; 6(7)1: 607-608;  . \"Hepatitis E infection during pregnancy and in the 3rd trimester, especially with genotype 1, is associated with more severe infection and might lead to fulminant hepatic failure and maternal death (11-13). Although the mechanism of liver injury is not yet clear, it is possible that interplay of hormonal and immunologic changes during pregnancy, along with a high viral load of HEV, renders the woman more vulnerable (14). Immunologic changes during pregnancy promote the maintenance of the fetus in the maternal environment by suppression of T cell-mediated immunity, rendering pregnant women more susceptible to viral infections like HEV infection. During pregnancy, levels of progesterone, estrogen, and human chorionic gonadotropin increase as pregnancy advances. These hormones play a considerable role in altering immune regulation and increasing viral replications (15). Hepatitis E infection with genotype 1 during the 3rd trimester can lead to maternal mortality in up to 15 per cent to 25 per cent of cases (16). Most of the studies showing high maternal mortality are from India, where infection occurs in epidemics. There is a very high risk of vertical transmission of HEV from the mother to the fetus. During a Delhi epidemic, a hospital-based study revealed that HEV infection during pregnancy was associated with miscarriage, stillbirth, or neonatal death in 56 per cent of infants (6). One recent study highlights that HEV infection might be responsible for 2400 to 3000 stillbirths each year in developing countries, with many additional fetal deaths linked to antenatal maternal deaths (11). There is a very high risk of preterm delivery in pregnant women with HEV infection, with poor neonatal survival rates (11,17). In 2 separate studies from India, 15 per cent to 50 per cent of live-born infants of mothers with HEV infection died within 1 week of birth (11,18). During an outbreak in Sudan in 2010 to 2011, among 39 pregnant women with HEV infection there were 14 intrauterine deaths and 9 premature deliveries (19).\" References ---------- 6. Naidu SS, Viswanathan R. Infectious hepatitis in pregnancy during Delhi epidemic. Indian J Med Res. 1957; 45(Suppl): 71-76. 11. Patra S, Kumar A, Trivedi SS, Puri M, Sarin SK. Maternal and fetal outcomes in pregnant women with acute hepatitis E virus infection. Ann Intern Med. 2007; 147(1): 28-33; abstract available at  . 12. Teo CG. Fatal outbreaks of jaundice in pregnancy and the epidemic history of hepatitis E. Epidemiol Infect. 2012; 140(5): 767-87; abstract available at . 13. Devi SG, Kumar A, Kar P, Husain SA, Sharma S. Association of pregnancy outcome with cytokine gene polymorphisms in HEV infection during pregnancy. J Med Virol. 2014; 86(8): 1366-76; abstract available at  . 14. Fiore S, Savasi V. Treatment of viral hepatitis in pregnancy. Expert Opin Pharmacother. 2009; 10(17): 2801-2809; abstract available at . 15. Navaneethan U, Al Mohajer M, Shata MT. Hepatitis E and pregnancy: understanding the pathogenesis. Liver Int. 2008; 28(9): 1190-9; available at . 16. Ranger-Rogez S, Alain S, Denis F. Hepatitis viruses: mother to child transmission [in French]. Pathol Biol (Paris) 2002; 50(9): 568-75; abstract available at  . 17. Krain LJ, Atwell JE, Nelson KE, Labrique AB. Fetal and neonatal health consequences of vertically transmitted hepatitis E virus infection. Am J Trop Med Hyg. 2014; 90(2): 365-70; available at  . 18. Rasheeda CA, Navaneethan U, Jayanthi V. Liver disease in pregnancy and its influence on maternal and fetal mortality: a prospective study from Chennai, Southern India. Eur J Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2008; 20(4): 362-4. 19. Rayis DA, Jumaa AM, Gasim GI, Karsany MS, Adam I. An outbreak of hepatitis E and high maternal mortality at Port Sudan, Eastern Sudan. Pathog Glob Health. 2013; 107(2): 66-8;  . - Mod.LL] [", "ANTHRAX - ROMANIA: (BOTOSANI) BOVINE, HUMAN SUSPECTED ***************************************************** A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases [1] Date: Tue 13 Jun 2017 10:35 EEST Source: Agerpres (National Press Agency) [in Romanian, trans. & summ. submitter SZ, edited] A 2nd case of suspected anthrax in a 16-year-old teenager was recorded in Flondora village, Manoleasa commune [in Boto\u015fani county], on [Tue 13 Jun 2017], by Prefect Dan Slincuat, a meeting of the Boto\u0219ani County Emergency Committee. According to him, the young woman is the daughter of a 46-year-old suspected of anthrax, who was hospitalized at Mavromati Emergency County Hospital on [Fri 9 Jun 2017]. Epidemiologist Irina Alecu from the Public Health Directorate mentioned that the condition of both patients is good, and they are in the hospital under specialized treatment, and responding well. Anthrax is curable with proper therapy and treatment. \"New information came to us yesterday [12 Jun 2017], when the Infectious Diseases Hospital announced that it was a man who had shown signs of anthrax. Therefore, we alerted all the units according to the procedures. We went to the territory to assess the family and contacts. The daughter of the [owner] was hospitalized yesterday [12 Jun 2017] because she presented a lesion in her hand,\" said Irina Alecu. Health authorities await the results of the laboratory tests carried out at the [Cantacuzino National Institute of Research-Development for Microbiology and Immunology in Bucharest] to confirm or rule out the anthrax cases from Flondora. Representatives of the Public Health Directorate (DSP), Sanitary Veterinary and Food Safety (DSVSA), and the Emergency Situations Inspectorate (ISU) went to Flondora on Monday afternoon [12 Jun 2017] to take the 1st steps for investigating cases. The DSVSA Director, Minodora Vasiliu, said there was an opportunity for anthrax to be contacted from a dead cattle. Veterinarians have launched an investigation that aims, among other things, to sample both the dead animal and the other 22 cattle that the man suspected of having contracted anthrax has in his household. The last 2 cases of anthrax were recorded in Boto\u015fani County in 2009. [Byline: Cristian Lupascu] -- Communicated by: Sabine Zentis Castleview English Longhorns Gut Laach D-52385 Nideggen Germany ****** [2] Date: Tue 13 Jun 2017 Source: Agerpres (National Press Agency) [in Romanian, trans. & summ. submitter SZ, edited] [In Romania there are several cases of anthrax every year, but the cutaneous form of the disease is not a very serious life-threatening form, as is pulmonary anthrax caused by inhalation of the spores of the bacillus,\" said Alexandru Rafila on behalf of the Minister of Health. \"Anthrax is not totally unusual in Romania. Generally there are several cases transmitted every year through contact with the diseased animal, that may lead to skin lesions that are treatable, and do not present such public health problems as the pulmonary or digestive forms of anthrax,\" explained Rafila. A Boto\u015fani farmer is suspected of having anthrax (cutaneous form), but for confirmation, biological samples were sent to the Cantacuzino Institute. \"It's a Boto\u015fani farmer who has several cattle that have been vaccinated against anthrax,\" he says. \"The local veterinary authority makes checks, and wants to see if there are any affected animals.\" The person has 3 skin lesions suggesting they might be anthrax, but have not been confirmed so far. Biological samples were sent to the Cantacuzino Institute for confirmation,\" the minister's adviser said. Rafila specified that the farmer is currently under treatment. [Byline: Roberto Stan] -- Communicated by: Sabine Zentis Castleview English Longhorns Gut Laach D-52385 Nideggen Germany [Maps of Romania can be seen at and . Boto\u015fani can be located on the map at  . If the farmer has 3 skin lesions it would have involved extensive handling of the carcass. It would appear that the herd had been vaccinated at some time, whether earlier this year (2017) or last is not clear. While a regular sporadic problem in the 1990s, usually of sheep, goats, and cattle, latterly it is infrequent with many years with no outbreaks. Unfortunately agricultural memories can be fragile and folk can forget what it looks like and handle a carcass foolishly. We will have to wait and see what comes of the hospital laboratory cultures, and from the veterinary investigation. Our thanks to Sabine for noting this outbreak and organising a translation. - Mod.MHJ] [", "LEGIONELLOSIS - USA (04): (FLORIDA, NEW YORK CITY, NEVADA) ********************************************************** A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases [1] Florida Date: Mon 12 Jun 2017 Source: Orlando Sentinel [edited] Two LA Fitness health clubs in Orange County [Florida] are under investigation after 4 customers contracted legionnaires' disease. 2 of the cases are tied to the club in MetroWest at 4792 Kirkman Road, said Kent Donahue, a spokesman for the Florida Department of Health in Orange County, and the other 2 cases are tied to the LA Fitness club at 12700 S. Orange Blossom Trail. The Florida Department of Health sent investigators to the club to take water samples last week [week of 5 Jun 2017], but results won't be available for about 2 weeks, Donahue said. It isn't certain that the 4 individuals contracted the illness at LA Fitness, but all 4 patients used the health clubs. The health department is not aware of other commonalities in the cases. A spokeswoman for LA Fitness did not immediately return a request for comment. LA Fitness sent notices to customers at the 2 facilities last week, warning them to watch out for any signs of legionnaires' disease. Legionnaires' disease is a serious respiratory illness caused by _Legionella_ bacteria. It is usually contracted through water systems or sometimes through air-conditioning systems. An LA Fitness health club in Ocoee was also investigated for signs of _Legionella_ bacteria in April [2017], but results of the [are?] negative, Donahue said (see ProMED-mail post Legionellosis - USA (03): (FL) spa & showers susp, RFI http://promedmail.org/post/20170422.4987402). Reports of legionnaires' disease and _Legionella_ bacteria are not common in Orange County, but happen more frequently in enclosed water systems, such as hot tubs, according to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. The CDC reports that there were about 6000 cases of legionnaires' diseases reported in 2015 in the United States. But LA Fitness in Central Florida has had 2 confirmed cases of the bacteria in recent years, including in 2008 at an LA Fitness in south downtown Orlando and in 2010 at an LA Fitness in the Waterford Lakes area. There was also a positive test for _Legionella_ bacteria at Florida Hospital Orlando in late 2015 and early 2016. The illness is more common in summer and early fall but can happen any time of year, according to the agency's website. Donahue said people at higher risk of contracting serious symptoms from the bacteria include people over 50, people with lung and respiratory diseases and people with compromised immune systems. Because of possible _Legionella_ bacteria, the 2 LA Fitness health clubs are being asked to use elevated levels of chlorine in spa areas and use extra filters on showers. -- Communicated by: Denis Green [The state of Florida can be located on the HealthMap/ProMED-mail interactive map at . Orange County can be seen on the map at  . - Sr.Tech.Ed.MJ] ****** [2] New York City (Manhattan) Date: Sun 11 Jun 2017 Source: New York Times [edited] Traces of the bacteria that cause legionnaires' disease have been found in the water at a Manhattan police station where an officer who recently fell ill works, the police and health officials said on [Sun 11 Jun 2017]. The police officer, whose name was not released, was recovering from legionnaires' disease at a hospital outside the city, while city Health Department workers looked for the source of the contamination discovered at the 23rd Precinct station house on East 102nd Street in East Harlem. The Health Department began investigating the water at the precinct on Friday night [9 Jun 2017], when it was notified that the officer had been diagnosed with the disease and that the _Legionella_ bacteria that cause it had been found in the police station's water supply. In a statement on [Sun 11 Jun 2017], the agency said this case of illness was \"potentially associated\" with the officer's workplace. Officers can still work in the building, but the Health Department has advised them to avoid taking showers there, and to use cold water for drinking and for preparing hot beverages and food until the investigation is complete. Hot water has been shut down at the precinct as a precaution, the police said. \"There is no public health risk to the larger community,\" the Health Department said in its statement. Officials did not say when the officer had become sick and received the diagnosis of legionnaires' disease, but the investigation began after the Patrolmen's Benevolent Association hired an independent contractor to test the precinct's water. Preliminary results turned up traces of the _Legionella_ bacteria, officials said, and the Health Department was studying those results and conducting its own tests. According to the Health Department, most cases of the disease can be traced to complex plumbing systems in which conditions are favorable for _Legionella_ growth, such as hot water tanks and cooling towers like those used in hotels and hospitals. The disease is contracted by breathing in water vapor containing the bacteria, but it is not contagious and can be treated with antibiotics. Older adults, smokers and people with weakened immune systems are especially vulnerable to the disease, according to the Mayo Clinic. Symptoms occur 2 to 10 days after a person is infected, and include chills, fever, headache, and muscle pain. At the 23rd Precinct station house, investigators have ruled out a cooling tower that was installed during renovations last month as the source of the bacteria. The cooling tower, which supports the building's heating and air conditioning system, has not been activated, and the previous tower was shut down in October [2016], the police said. An outbreak of legionnaires' disease in the South Bronx killed 12 people and sickened 128 others in July and August of 2015, the largest outbreak on record in the city, according to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. In response, the mayor and City Council passed a law to reduce and contain _Legionella_ growth in cooling towers. The law requires building owners to register cooling towers with the Health Department, and to clean and test them quarterly for _Legionella_. The rule applies to more than 3500 buildings in the city. [Byline: Ashley Southall] -- Communicated by: Denis Green [The state of New York can be located on the HealthMap/ProMED-mail interactive map at . Manhattan can be seen on the map at  . - Sr.Tech.Ed.MJ] ****** [3] Nevada (Las Vegas) Date: Mon 12 Jun 2017 Source: Fox News [edited] The Southern Nevada Health District is investigating 2 cases of legionnaire's disease recently discovered at the Rio Hotel in Las Vegas. 2 guests were found to have had the bacteria while staying at the hotel in the months of March and April [2017]. In a statement posted on their website [9 Jun 2017], the Southern Nevada Health District says, \"The hotel is assisting in the investigation and taking steps to provide information to past and current guests of the property.\" Once the guests' illnesses were confirmed, the Rio then inspected its water system. Results came back positive for the bacteria, _Legionella_, according to the health district. The hotel has begun efforts to disinfect the rooms in the hotel through a process called \"remediation,\" in which chlorine is used at very high temperatures in each room. Caesars Entertainment, which owns the Rio Hotel issued a statement to Fox News saying, \"Test results on the water at the Rio All-Suite Hotel and Casino indicated the presence of the _Legionella_ bacteria. The company is working closely with the Southern Nevada Health District and taking aggressive remediation actions to ensure the safety of Rio's water. \"Out of an abundance of caution, we are relocating guests from rooms where remediation actions are being undertaken.\" A human can contract legionnaire's disease by inhaling aerosol water droplets from a number of different spaces with water like the shower, hot tubs, cooling towers, or decorative fountains. The health district notes that most people will not get sick when exposed to the bacteria, but it has the potential to cause severe illness and even death. According to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), there are about 5000 cases of legionnaire's reported each year in the US. Outbreaks recently in Flint, Michigan and the South Bronx in New York have led to several deaths. [Byline: Andrew Craft] -- Communicated by: Denis Green [ProMED-mail thanks Denis Green for his submissions. The state of Nevada can be located on the HealthMap/ProMED-mail interactive map at . Las Vegas can be seen on the map at  . - Sr.Tech.Ed.MJ For a discussion of legionellosis, please see my moderator comments in the prior ProMED-mail posts: Legionellosis - USA (04): (AZ) neonatal, underwater birthing http://promedmail.org/post/20170608.5093537; Legionellosis - USA (03): (FL) spa & showers susp, RFI http://promedmail.org/post/20170422.4987402; Legionellosis - USA (02): (MI) genotyping, RFI http://promedmail.org/post/20170217.4846471; and Legionellosis - USA: (NY) commercial spa pool http://promedmail.org/post/20170107.4747816. - Mod.ML] [", "SCABIES - UNITED STATES: (TENNESSEE) JAIL OUTBREAK ************************************************** A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Mon 12 Jun 2017, 7:39 PM Source: wkrn.com [edited] The scabies outbreak that affected dozens of female inmates at a Nashville jail has spread to inmates at the nearby men's facility. Metro Public Health Department officials say at least 2 new scabies cases were reported [Mon 12 Jun 2017] morning at the men's facility run by private contractor CoreCivic. All male inmates at the Harding Place facility will be treated for scabies as a precaution. A Metro Public Health Department official told News 2 [Mon 12 Jun 2017] night the outbreak is under investigation. The news comes after at least 39 inmates were infected by scabies rashes at the women's facility. Last month [May 2017], the outbreak also spread to the Justice A.A. Birch general sessions court building in downtown Nashville. An unknown number of infected inmates were transferred to court hearings, where the parasites spread to courthouse employees, lawyers, and members of the general public. As a result, a Nashville attorney has filed a lawsuit against CoreCivic, formerly known as Corrections Corporation of America (CCA). Attorney Gary Blackburn has filed the lawsuit and will seek class action certification. He says at least 40 people were infected by scabies because of the courthouse outbreak, including family members of people who work at the courthouse. In addition to damages for pain and suffering and lost wages, Blackburn is also seeking punitive damages for his clients. \"When this happens, it's highly contagious. So people have to be quarantined,\" Blackburn said. \"One of my clients missed his daughter's rehearsal dinner because of it. It can cause you to miss time from work.\" [Byline: Nick Caloway] -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts [Outbreaks of this magnitude are highly unusual. Strict hygiene with daily change of clothes, bed linen and daily showers will reduce the burden of scabies mites. There are 2 treatment options, permethrin containing cream and ivermectin tablets. In the present outbreak it would probably be much easier to use ivermectin, thus ensuring better compliance. - Mod.EP A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  .] [", "HISTOPLASMOSIS - BRAZIL: (FEDERAL DISTRICT) FIREFIGHTERS, BAT CAVE ****************************************************************** A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Fri 9 Jun 2017 Source: globo.com, G1 [in Portuguese, machine trans., edited] Firefighters who attended a rescue course in a cave in Brazl\u00e2ndia, Federal District, are hospitalized with suspected histoplasmosis - an infection caused by inhaling spores from a fungus that is found in bird feces and bat guano. The training took place between [16 and 19 May 2017], but only now did the symptoms begin to be felt by the group. The information was confirmed by the DF Health Department and the Fire Department. According to the Department, at least 18 people, including students and instructors, had headaches and a persistent fever. A total of 11 are being treated at the Hospital Maria Auxiliadora, a private institution in the Gama region, and a military man is hospitalized at the Regional Hospital of the North Wing (Hran). The other soldiers have been discharged. The briefing said 25 firefighters participated in the training. All the soldiers are in epidemiological investigation and will be monitored. In G1, firefighters said that during the test preparation, the instructors of the corporation did not realize the amount of bats that were in the cave. In a statement, the Health Department said that a Health Surveillance team inspected the cave and that the area was isolated. At around 3:45 pm on [Fri 9 Jun 2017], firefighters sent a note on the case and said they are being provided all necessary support to the military involved: \"Faced with the news published in some information vehicles about the situation involving the military of the corporation, the Fire Brigade of the Federal District of the DF is public to clarify that: \"Due to the nature of the activities of the Fire Department, which includes search and rescue activities in inhospitable places, it is necessary to prepare the military adequately for missions in wilderness and caves, whose training takes place through specialization courses such as Operational Crew Course. \"Thus, the CBMDF military underwent natural search and rescue training in the Brazlandia region, about 15 days ago. After a week of training, some military personnel began to present flu-like symptoms, with fever and respiratory discomfort, which persisted after the use of medication commonly indicated for these cases, leading them to seek medical attention for a more accurate diagnosis. \"Faced with this, the CBMDF highlighted a medical epidemiologist of the corporation to follow up the cases and take the measures that the case requires.\" \"The information updated as of today [Fri 9 Jun 2017], indicates that 10 soldiers were hospitalized in the hospital network, and 1 has already been discharged and another 2 are expected to be discharged soon, due to the clinical picture they present. In addition, 10 military personnel also sought care and did not require hospitalization. \"In addition, we inform you that the Epidemiological Surveillance and Sanitary Surveillance of the Health Department were activated to monitor and confirm the initial diagnosis. The Fire Department explains that it has provided all necessary support to the military involved, appointing a specialized medical staff to follow up on the case.\" [Byline: Let\u00edcia Carvalho and Mara Puljiz] -- Communicated by: ProMED-PORT promed@promedmail.org [As a review, the following was obtained from Medscape  : \"_Histoplasma capsulatum_ is a dimorphic fungus that remains in a mycelial form at ambient temperatures and grows as yeast at body temperature in mammals. Infection causes histoplasmosis. Although the fungus that causes histoplasmosis can be found in temperate climates throughout the world, it is endemic to the Ohio, Missouri, and Mississippi River valleys in the United States. Internationally, the fungus is predominantly found in river valleys in North and Central America, eastern and southern Europe, and parts of Africa, eastern Asia, and Australia. \"The soil in areas endemic for histoplasmosis provides an acidic damp environment with high organic content that is good for mycelial growth. Highly infectious soil is found near areas inhabited by bats and birds. Birds cannot be infected by the fungus and do not transmit the disease; however, bird excretions contaminate the soil, thereby enriching the growth medium for the mycelium. In contrast, bats can become infected, and they transmit histoplasmosis through droppings. Contaminated soil can be potentially infectious for years. Outbreaks of histoplasmosis have been associated with construction and renovation activities that disrupt contaminated soil. In addition, travelers to endemic areas are at risk for histoplasmosis because airborne spores can travel hundreds of feet. \"Most individuals with histoplasmosis are asymptomatic. Those who develop clinical manifestations are usually immunocompromised or are exposed to a high quantity of inoculum. _Histoplasma_ species may remain latent in healed granulomas and recur, if there is impairment of cell-mediated immunity. \"Approximately 90 per cent of patients are asymptomatic. If symptoms develop, onset occurs 3-14 days after exposure. Fever, headache, malaise, myalgia, abdominal pain, and chills are common symptoms; usually, histoplasmosis is self-limited. Individuals exposed to a large inoculum may develop severe dyspnea resulting from diffuse pulmonary involvement. Joint pain and skin lesions occur in 5-6 per cent of patients, mostly in females. Enlarged hilar [the hilum is part of a gland or organ through which ducts, nerves, or blood vessels enter and leave] and mediastinal lymph nodes are present in 5-10 per cent of patients. Cough, hemoptysis, dyspnea, and/or chest pain may be present and are related to the degree of compression on the pulmonary airway and circulation. Paratracheal involvement may cause cough or dyspnea because of compression on the trachea or bronchi.\" - Mod.LL A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  .] [", "AMERICAN FOULBROOD, APIS - NETHERLANDS: (DRENTHE) OIE ***************************************************** A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Tue 13 Jun 2017 Source: OIE, WAHID (World Animal Health Information Database), weekly disease information 2017; 30(24) [edited] American foulbrood of honey bees [AFB], Netherlands --------------------------------------------------- Information received on 13 Jun 2017 from Dr Christianne Bruschke, Chief Veterinary Officer, Ministry of Economic Affairs, Ministry of Economic Affairs, The Hague, Netherlands Summary Report type: immediate notification Date of start of the event: 2 Jun 2017 Date of confirmation of the event: 9 Jun 2017 Report date: 12 Jun 2017 Reason for notification: recurrence of a listed disease Date of previous occurrence: 27 Jul 2015 Manifestation of disease: clinical disease Causal agent: _Paenibacillus larvae_ Nature of diagnosis: clinical, laboratory (advanced) This event pertains to a defined zone within the country New outbreaks (2) Outbreak 1 (AVB 2017-01): Exloo, Drenthe Date of start of the outbreak: 2 Jun 2017 Outbreak status: continuing (or date resolved not provided) Epidemiological unit: apiary Affected animals: Species / Susceptible / Cases / Deaths / Killed and disposed of / Slaughtered Bees (hives) / 5 / 2 / - / 2 / 0 Affected population: Two of five hives had clinical signs of American foulbrood of honey bees. Outbreak 2 (AVB 2017-02): Weerdinge, Drenthe Date of start of the outbreak: 2 Jun 2017 Outbreak status: continuing (or date resolved not provided) Epidemiological unit: apiary Affected animals: Species / Susceptible / Cases / Deaths / Killed and disposed of / Slaughtered Bees (hives) / 2 / 2 / 0 / 2 / 0 Affected population: Both hives had clinical signs of American foulbrood of honey bees. Summary of outbreaks Total outbreaks: 2 Total animals affected: Species / Susceptible / Cases / Deaths / Killed and disposed of / Slaughtered Bees (hives) / 7 / 4 / 0 / 4 / 0 Outbreak statistics [rates apparent, expressed as percentages] Species / Morbidity rate / Mortality rate / Case fatality rate / Proportion susceptible animals lost* Bees (hives) / 57.14 / ** / ** / ** *Removed from the susceptible population through death, destruction, and/or slaughter ** Not calculated because of missing information Epidemiology Source of the outbreak(s) or origin of infection: unknown or inconclusive Epidemiological comment: A 3 km [approx. 2 mi] perimeter has been established around the outbreak. Control measures Measures applied: movement control inside the country, screening, stamping out, zoning, vaccination permitted (if a vaccine exists), no treatment of affected animals Measures to be applied: no other measures Diagnostic test results Laboratory name and type / Species / Test / Test date / Result Wageningen Bioveterinary Research, Lelystad (National laboratory) / Bees / pathogenic agent isolation on culture / 9 Jun 2017 / Positive Future reporting The event is continuing. Weekly follow-up reports will be submitted. [The location of the outbreak can be seen on the interactive map included in the OIE report at the source URL above.] -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail [\"AFB is the most serious bacterial disease of honey bee brood and is caused by the bacterium _Paenibacillus larvae_. The disease is transferred and initiated only by the spore stage of the bacterium. The reason this disease is so serious is that the spores can remain viable and last indefinitely on beekeeping equipment. It is extremely contagious and spreads easily on contaminated equipment, hive tools, and beekeeper's hands. A beekeeper's best way to manage AFB is to avoid it.\"  . - Mod.CRD A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  .] [", "SNAKE FUNGAL DISEASE - USA: UPDATE ********************************** A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Tue 13 Jun 2017 Source: National Geographic [edited] In the last 2 decades, fungal diseases have rapidly attacked populations of frogs, bats, and salamanders. The latest victims under siege are snakes, and if snake fungal disease isn't stopped, researchers say it could yield disastrous results. Snake fungal disease -- caused by the pathogen _Ophidiomyces ophiodiicola_ -- is marked by skin lesions and thick blisters that can disfigure a snake's face and even prevent it from being able to eat, often leading to starvation. The outcome of the disease varies between species, but the mortality rate is especially high in rattlesnakes, including the eastern massasauga rattlesnake. About 30 snake species have been found to be infected in at least 15 states in the United States, and many of the world's 3000 snake species are just as vulnerable, said Jonathan Kolby, an American biologist and conservationist. \"It just seems one after the other that these emerging fungal diseases are appearing in different types of animals, yet they're spread enigmatically,\" said Kolby, who is also a National Geographic explorer. \"We don't know where exactly they came from or why they suddenly appear to be more virulent.\" Snakes help to keep the rodent population in check, but if they are decimated by snake fungal disease, the number of mice and rats could swell. Because rodents are known to spread ticks and other parasites, this is worrisome for human health, said Kolby. \"This is especially important now, with talk of this being one of the worst Lyme disease years that we've had in a long time,\" he said. While the exact cause of the spread of snake fungal disease is unknown, researchers are looking at environmental changes as a potential driver, said Jeffrey Lorch, a microbiologist at the United States Geological Survey. \"It could be that if we're experiencing cooler and wetter springs in which snakes have to spend more time underground and not be able to reach those high body temperatures necessary to fight off infection that it could leave them more susceptible,\" he said. Habitat destruction could also prevent snakes from seeking out the ideal conditions to fend off infections, he said. The snake fungal disease research community is small, and there isn't much long-term data on snake population trends, Lorch added. Jennifer Moore and her research team at the Pierce Cedar Creek Institute in Hastings, Michigan, are creating a longer-term data set to examine the implication of the disease on eastern massasauga rattlesnakes. The University of Illinois is also testing treatments to battle snake fungal disease, one of which uses nebulizers to deliver drugs to an infected snake. Though snake fungal disease currently appears to mainly be an issue in the United States, the disease has also been identified in snakes in captivity in England, Germany, and Australia, Kolby said. \"I'm concerned about spillover and introduction to other countries if the United States might be the point source,\" he said. \"I think that deserves more attention from other countries, too.\" [Byline: Hannah Lang] -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts [Snake fungal disease (SFD) is an emerging disease of wild snakes in the eastern and midwestern USA, lately also found in Canada. A recent experimental study reproduced the skin lesions observed in the field and confirmed that the etiologic agent is the fungus _Ophidiomyces ophiodiicola_. This fungus had been consistently associated with the often-fatal skin, face, and eye lesions characteristic of the disease. In recent years, cases of this fungal infection have been increasing. A picture of the lesions observed in snakes with SFD can be seen at  . The hypothesis suggesting a role for environmental stressors in the emergence of this disease is reasonable. When the stress-host-parasite equilibrium is broken, the tolerance and resistance to parasites is reduced and hosts become increasingly deteriorated (for a review on the subject see ). - Mod.PMB A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  .] [", "MERS-COV (38): SAUDI ARABIA (RIYADH), NOSOCOMIAL TRANSMISSION, WHO ****************************************************************** A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases In this update: [1] Saudi Arabia, 3 newly confirmed cases/infections, 1 fatality [2] Saudi Arabia - WHO update 13 Jun 2017 ****** [1] Saudi Arabia, 3 newly confirmed cases/infections, 1 fatality Date: Tue 13 Jun 2017 Source: Saudi MOH 12-13 Jun 2017 [edited] As of 14:00 [2:00 PM] today [Tue 13 Jun 2017], there have been a total of: 1657 laboratory-confirmed cases of MERS-CoV infection, including 670 deaths [reported case fatality rate 40.4 percent], 943 recoveries, and 44 currently active cases/infections. [As previously mentioned, the numbers of deaths, recoveries and currently active cases come from my spreadsheet tallies and differ from those listed on the Saudi MOH website; my spreadsheet counts asymptomatic infections. - Mod.MPP] Since the last ProMED-mail update [Sun 11 Jun 2017], there have been a total of: 3 newly confirmed cases/infections [including 1 asymptomatic infection in a contact] 1 newly reported fatality, and 0 newly reported recoveries. Information on newly confirmed cases (3 cases/infections) - all from Riyadh - all nosocomial transmission Date: Tue 13 Jun 2017 (2 cases) 1 - A 53-year-old expat female, healthcare worker, currently in stable condition. Classified as a secondary healthcare acquired case in a healthcare worker. 2 - A 58-year-old Saudi male, non-healthcare worker, currently in stable condition. Classified as a secondary healthcare acquired case in a patient. Date: Mon 12 Jun 2017 (1 asymptomatic infection) 3 - A 45-year-old expat female, healthcare worker, currently in stable condition, identified as an asymptomatic contact of previously confirmed MERS-CoV infected individual. Classified as a secondary healthcare acquired case in a healthcare worker. Information on newly confirmed fatality (1 fatality) Date: Tue 13 Jun 2017 - A 46-year-old Saudi male, non-healthcare worker with a history of pre-existing co-morbidities. [reported as a newly confirmed case on 3 Jun 2017 at which time he was noted to be in critical condition. Classified as still under investigation at the time of initial confirmation report, but identified as one of the nosocomial transmitted cases by WHO (see case No. 7 in section [2] below). - Mod.MPP] -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail [Hopefully the nosocomial transmission is being interrupted now in Riyadh as there have been fewer cases identified in the past 48 hours (only 3 newly confirmed cases/infections in the past 48 hours as compared with 6, 11, and 8 reported infections in preceding 48 hour intervals. The WHO update in section [2] below helps clarify that there are 3 simultaneous nosocomial outbreaks ongoing in Riyadh at the moment. After several months with minimal identified nosocomial transmission, one can't help but wonder what has occurred in Saudi Arabia to explain these ongoing transmission chains. - Mod.MPP] ****** [2] Saudi Arabia - WHO update 13 Jun 2017 Date: 13 Jun 2017 Source: WHO Emergencies preparedness, response, Disease Outbreak News (DONs) [edited] Middle East respiratory syndrome coronavirus (MERS-CoV) - Saudi Arabia 13 Jun 2017 -------------------------------------------------------------------------------- Between 1 and 10 Jun 2017, the national IHR focal point of Saudi Arabia reported 35 additional cases of Middle East Respiratory Syndrome Coronavirus (MERS-CoV) infection including 3 fatal cases and 1 death among previously reported cases (case number 5 in the Disease Outbreak News published on 6 Jun 2017). Details of the cases -------------------- Detailed information concerning the cases reported can be found in a separate document [see chart at end of this section]. A total of 32 of the 35 newly reported cases are associated with 3 simultaneous clusters of MERS, of which 2 are related. A description of the 3 clusters is below. Cluster 1 A cluster of MERS has been identified in a hospital in Riyadh city, Riyadh Region; 23 cases associated with this cluster thus far and include the 1st identified case (a 47-year-old male reported on [1 Jun 2017]), 14 asymptomatic health care worker contacts, 1 household contact, and 7 hospital contacts who were patients. Cluster 2 This MERS cluster is occurring in a 2nd hospital in Riyadh City, Riyadh Region. This cluster is related to cluster 1 above. The 1st identified case of this 2nd cluster visited the emergency room of the cluster 1 hospital. He was asymptomatic and following this visit in hospital 1, he continued to receive kidney dialysis sessions in the 2nd hospital. To date, this cluster involves 6 cases, including the case involved in cluster 1, and secondary household and health care worker contacts. Cluster 3 This MERS cluster is currently occurring in a 3rd hospital in Riyadh city, Riyadh Region. To date the cluster involves the 4 cases including the 1st identified case who reported contacts with dromedary camels and 3 asymptomatic or mild cases that were health care worker contacts. Public health response ---------------------- The Ministry of Health of Saudi Arabia is evaluating each case and their contacts and implementing measures to limit further human-to-human transmission and bring these outbreaks to a control. These measures include: - Proper isolation for all confirmed cases; - Active tracing for all contacts of patients, healthcare workers and community contacts; - Identification of high and low risk contacts with daily monitoring for all during incubation period of the 14 days and performing laboratory testing for high risk contacts, regardless of the development of symptoms; - Regular updating of the line list of cases and contacts and conducting epidemiological analysis of data to identify the source of infection, links between patients and reasons for human-to-human transmission within hospitals; - Searching for suspected cases between patients and healthcare workers based on case definition of the disease; - Enforcement of strict adherence to proper environmental cleaning, disinfection and terminal cleaning and disinfection for hospital environment with special care in departments where the outbreaks are currently occurring or have occurred; - Enforcement of visual triage for respiratory diseases in emergency department and outpatient departments and ensure the 24/7 availability of a trained nurse for early detection of patients with respiratory symptoms, and proper documentation in triage forms; - Extensive training of all healthcare workers on case definition for early detection, implementation of isolation precautions, proper selection, donning and doffing of PPEs, hand hygiene and environmental cleaning and disinfection; - Ensuring that all healthcare workers tested for N95 fitting (fit test); - Ensuring availability of infection prevention supplies including hand sanitizer, PPEs, surface disinfectants, portable HEPA filters and fumigation machines; - Enforcing the implementation of a policy of not allowing healthcare workers to travel without medical clearance to prevent the spread of the virus to other countries. For cases that report contact with dromedary camels, investigations of MERS-CoV infection in dromedaries is conducted by Ministry of Agriculture officials. Globally, 2015 laboratory-confirmed cases of infection with MERS-CoV including at least 703 related deaths have been reported to WHO since 2012. Line listing of newly confirmed cases from 1-10 Jun 2017 Case no. / Date report WHO / City of residence / Age / Sex / HCW / Co-morbidities / Camel exposure / Camel milk / Exposure to other cases / Date of onset of symptoms / Date of hospitalization / Date of lab confirmation / Status / Date of outcome 1 / 2017-06-01 / Riyadh / 47 / M / No / Yes / NA / NA / Yes / 2017-05-26 / 2017-05-28 / 2017-05-30 / Alive 2 / 2017-06-02 / Riyadh / 30 / F / Yes / No / No / NA / Yes / NA / NA / 2017-06-02 / Alive* 3 / 2017-06-02 / Riyadh / 33 / F / Yes / No / NA / NA / Yes / NA / NA / 2017-06-02 / Alive* 4 / 2017-06-02 / Riyadh / 30 / F / Yes / No / No / NA / Yes / NA / NA / 2017-06-02 / Alive* 5 / 2017-06-02 / Jeddah / 51 / M / No / Yes / NA / NA / Yes / 2017-05-28 / NA / 2017-06-02 / Alive 6 / 2017-06-03 / Riyadh / 65 / M / No / Yes / NA / NA / Yes / 2017-06-02 / 2017-05-28 / 2017-06-03 / Deceased / 2017-06-03 7 / 2017-06-03 / Riyadh / 46 / M / No / Yes / No / NA / NA / 2017-06-01 / NA / 2017-06-03 / Alive 8 / 2017-06-03 / Riyadh / 24 / M / No / No / Yes / NA / No / 2017-05-28 / 2017-06-02 / 2017-06-03 / Deceased / 2017-06-03 9 / 2017-06-04 / Riyadh / 46 / M / No / Yes / NA / NA / Yes / NA / NA / 2017-06-03 / Alive* 10 / 2017-06-04 / Riyadh / 27 / M / Yes / No / No / NA / Yes / NA / NA / 2017-06-04 / Alive* 11 / 2017-06-04 / Madinah / 73 / M / No / Yes / Yes / Yes / No / 2017-06-01 / 2017-06-03 / 2017-06-04 / Alive 12 / 2017-06-05 / Riyadh / 66 / F / No / Yes / No / NA / Yes / 2017-06-03 / NA / 2017-06-04 / Alive* 13 / 2017-06-05 / Riyadh / 29 / M / No / No / NA / NA / Yes / NA / NA / NA / Alive* 14 / 2017-06-05 / Riyadh / 32 / F / Yes / No / No / NA / Yes / NA / NA / 2017-06-02 / Alive* 15 / 2017-06-05 / Riyadh / 27 / M / No / NA / No / NA / Yes / 2017-06-03 / 2017-05-27 / 2017-06-04 / Alive 16 / 2017-06-06 / Hofuf City / 45 / M / No / No / NA / Yes / No / 2017-06-01 / 2017-06-04 / 2017-06-05 / Alive 17 / 2017-06-06 / Riyadh / 84 / M / No / Yes / No / NA / Yes / NA / NA / 2017-06-05 / Alive* 18 / 2017-06-06 / Riyadh / 48 / M / Yes / No / No / NA / Yes / NA / NA / 2017-06-04 / Alive* 19 / 2017-06-07 / Riyadh / 35 / F / No / No / No / NA / Yes / NA / NA / 2017-06-06 / Alive* 20 / 2017-06-07 / Riyadh / 42 / F / Yes / NA / No / NA / Yes / 2017-06-03 / NA / 2017-06-06 / Alive 21 / 2017-06-07 / Riyadh / 45 / F / Yes / No / No / NA / Yes / NA / NA / 2017-06-06 / Alive* 22 / 2017-06-07 / Riyadh / 57 / F / No / Yes / No / NA / Yes / NA / NA / 2017-06-06 / Alive* 23 / 2017-06-07 / Riyadh / 39 / M / Yes / No / No / NA / Yes / NA / NA / 2017-06-06 / Alive* 24 / 2017-06-08 / Riyadh / 30 / F / Yes / No / No / NA / Yes / NA / NA / 2017-06-07 / Alive* 25 / 2017-06-08 / Riyadh / 31 / F / Yes / No / No / NA / Yes / NA / NA / 2017-06-07 / Alive* 26 / 2017-06-08 / Riyadh / 25 / M / Yes / No / No / NA / Yes / NA / NA / 2017-06-07 / Alive* 27 / 2017-06-08 / Riyadh / 58 / M / No / Yes / No / No / Yes / NA / 2017-05-31 / 2017-06-07 / Alive 28 / 2017-06-08 / Riyadh / 48 / M / No / Yes / No / No / Yes / NA / 2017-05-30 / 2017-06-07 / Alive 29 / 2017-06-09 / Riyadh / 26 / F / Yes / No / No / NA / Yes / NA / NA / 2017-06-08 / Alive* 30 / 2017-06-09 / Riyadh / 28 / F / Yes / No / No / NA / Yes / NA / NA / 2017-06-08 / Alive* 31 / 2017-06-09 / Riyadh / 31 / F / Yes / No / No / NA / Yes / NA / NA / 2017-06-08 / Alive* 32 / 2017-06-09 / Riyadh / 34 / F / Yes / No / No / NA / Yes / NA / NA / 2017-06-08 / Alive* 33 / 2017-06-09 / Riyadh / 48 / F / Yes / No / No / NA / Yes / NA / NA / 2017-06-07 / Alive* 34 / 2017-06-09 / Riyadh / 27 / F / Yes / No / No / NA / Yes / NA / NA / 2017-06-08 / Alive* 35 / 2017-06-10 / Riyadh / 32 / M / No / Yes / No / NA / NA / 2017-06-02 / 2017-05-16 / 2017-06-04 / Deceased / 2017-06-10 * asymptomatic contact -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail [According to this most recent WHO update on MERS-CoV, as of 10 Jun 2017 there have now been 2015 laboratory confirmed cases of MERS-CoV infection reported to WHO, including at least 703 related deaths, with Saudi Arabia having reported 1649 (81.8 percent) cases including 669 (95.2 percent) deaths. Additional information provided in the above reports is the existence of ongoing nosocomial transmission chains in 3 separate healthcare facilities with an apparent relation between 2 of the 3 facilities. The text above seems to suggest there was a possible asymptomatic contact that was in the emergency room of one hospital who then continued receiving renal dialysis at another hospital where he presumably began a 2nd chain of transmission. Unfortunately, the line listing accompanying this update does not \"connect the dots\" of the 3 transmission chains to enable actually tracing the chains of transmission. In the previous WHO update from 6 Jun 2017, there was mention of 3 clusters of transmission of which one occurred in Riyadh city (the other 2 clusters involved Bisha and Wadi Aldawasir, the latter in Riyadh province). According to that update: \"Cluster 2 A cluster of cases has been identified in a hospital in Riyadh city, Riyadh Region. Cases associated with this cluster are: 1st identified fatal case: A 55-year-old male reported to WHO on 14 May 2017. Secondary case - Healthcare contact: A 33-year-old male reported to WHO on 15 May 2017. Secondary case - Healthcare contact: A 30-year-old female reported to WHO on 15 May 2017. Secondary case - Healthcare contact: A 25-year-old female reported to WHO on 16 May 2017. Secondary case - Healthcare contact: A 38-year-old male reported to WHO on 17 May 2017. According to this update, the 3 chains of transmission began on 1 Jun 2017. One presumes that the 3 hospital outbreaks reported in today's update are not related to the earlier nosocomial outbreak reported in the middle of May 2017. Additional information on the 35 cases reported above is that case no.7 was reported as a fatality in today's Saudi MOH update (see section [1] above), and case no.27 was possibly the case reported as a recovery on 9 Jun 2017. We await further clarifications on these transmission chains. As mentioned above, one can't help but wonder what has occurred in Saudi Arabia to explain these ongoing nosocomial transmission chains after months of limited to none nosocomial transmission chains. The HealthMap/ProMED map of Saudi Arabia can be found at:  . - Mod.MPP A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  .] [", "GYRODACTYLUS SALARIS - SWEDEN: (HALLANDS LAN) SALMON, OIE ********************************************************* A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Tue 13 Jun 2017 Source: OIE, WAHID (World Animal Health Information Database), weekly disease information 2017; 30(24) [edited] Infection with _Gyrodactylus salaris_, Sweden --------------------------------------------- Information received on 13 Jun 2017 from Dr Ingrid Eilertz, chief veterinary officer, director and head, Swedish Board of Agriculture Department for Animal Welfare and Health, Ministry for Rural Affairs, Jonkoping, Sweden Summary Report type: immediate notification (final report) Date of start of the event: 17 Apr 2017 Date of confirmation of the event: 22 May 2017 Date event resolved: 22 May 2017 Reason for notification: reoccurrence of a listed disease Date of previous occurrence: 23 Oct 2015 Manifestation of disease: sub-clinical infection Causal agent: _Gyrodactylus salaris_ Nature of diagnosis: Laboratory (advanced) This event pertains to a defined zone within the country New outbreaks (1) Summary of outbreaks: Total outbreaks: 1 Outbreak 1: Kungsbackaan, Kungsbacka, Hallands Lan [county] Date of start of the outbreak: 17 Apr 2017 Outbreak status: resolved 22 May 2017 Epidemiological unit: river system Water type: fresh water Population type: wild Production system: open Total animals affected: Species / Morbidity / Mortality / Susceptible / Cases / Deaths / Killed and disposed of / Slaughtered Salmon (_Salmo salar_) / 0 percent / 0 percent) / - / 1 / - / 1 / - Affected population: wild Atlantic salmon (_Salmo salar_) were collected and sampled within an on-going monitoring program. Epidemiology Source of the outbreak(s) or origin of infection: unknown or inconclusive Control measures Measures applied: movement control inside the country; surveillance outside infected and/or protection zone, surveillance within infected and/or protection zone, vaccination permitted (if a vaccine exists), no treatment of affected animals. Measures to be applied: no other measures Diagnostic test results Laboratory name and type / Species / Test / Test date / Result Norwegian Veterinary Institute (national laboratory) / Salmon (_Salmo salar_) / nucleotide sequencing / 22 May 2017/ Positive Norwegian Veterinary Institute (regional reference laboratory) / Salmon (_Salmo salar_) / polymerase chain reaction / 22 May 2017 / Positive Future reporting The event is resolved. No more reports will be submitted. [The location of the outbreak can be seen on the interactive map included in the OIE report at the source URL above.] -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail [_Gyrodactylus salaris_ (Platyhelminthes; Monogenea) is a viviparous freshwater parasite that may cause infection in Atlantic salmon (_Salmo salar_). It is an obligate parasite with a direct life cycle. Parasites give birth to live offspring, and there are no eggs, resting stages, specialized transmission stages or intermediate hosts. _Gyrodactylus salaris_ is an ectoparasite mainly on Atlantic salmon, but can survive and reproduce on several salmonids, such as rainbow trout (_Oncorhynchus mykiss_), Arctic charr (_Salvelinus alpinus_), North American brook trout (_Salvelinus fontinalis_), grayling (_Thymallus thymallus_), North American lake trout (_Salvelinus namaycush_) and brown trout (_Salmo trutta_) (in declining order of susceptibility). This parasite occurs on the fins of most infected Atlantic salmon, but site preference is dependent on intensity of infection. Parasites are also commonly found on the body and less commonly on the gills. On other hosts, the distribution may be different, but on some host species the parasite is relatively less abundant on the fins and relatively more common on the body compared with salmon. Its distribution is restricted to Europe. It has been recovered from farmed Atlantic salmon or farmed rainbow trout in several (mainly northern) European countries. In the wild, the parasite has been found on wild salmonids, mainly Atlantic salmon parr, in rivers in Russia, Sweden and Norway. In 2006, _G. salaris_ was reported from fish farms in Italy and, in 2007, from fish farms in Poland and Macedonia, and in 2009, from fish farms in Romania. Great Britain and Ireland have been demonstrated to be free of the parasite. Mortality can be 100 percent in susceptible farmed Atlantic salmon if not treated. Mortality in Norwegian rivers can be as high as 98 percent, with an average of about 85 percent. Mortality in other susceptible host species is usually low or not observed. For a picture of _G. salaris_ go to  . Portions of this comment were extracted from  . - Mod.PMB A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  .] [", "LUMPY SKIN DISEASE - EUROPE (06): RUSSIA (SARATOV) BOVINE, OIE ************************************************************** A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Tue 13 Jun 2017 Source: OIE, WAHID (World Animal Health Information Database), weekly disease information 2017; 30(24) [edited] Lumpy skin disease, Russia -------------------------- Information received on 13 Jun 2017 from Dr Evgeny Nepoklonov, Vice-minister, Ministry of Agriculture, Moscow, Russia Summary Report type: Immediate notification Date of start of the event: 5 Jun 2017 Date of confirmation of the event: 9 Jun 2017 Reason for notification: Recurrence of a listed disease Date of previous occurrence: 15 Feb 2017 Manifestation of disease: Clinical disease Causal agent: Lumpy skin disease virus Nature of diagnosis: Clinical, Laboratory (advanced) This event pertains to a defined zone within the country New outbreaks (1) Summary of outbreaks, Total outbreaks: 1 Location: Altata, Dergachevsky, Saratovskaya Oblast Date of start of the outbreak: 5 Jun 2017 Outbreak status: Continuing (or date resolved not provided) Epidemiological unit: Backyard Total animals affected: Species/ Susceptible/ Cases/ Deaths/ Destroyed/ Slaughtered Cattle / 12 / 1 / 0 / 1 / 0 Outbreak statistics [rates apparent, expressed as percentages] Species / Morbidity rate / Mortality rate / Case fatality rate / Proportion susceptible animals lost* Cattle / 8.33 / 0 / 0 / 8.33 *Removed from the susceptible population through death, destruction, and/or slaughter Epidemiology Source of the outbreak(s) or origin of infection: unknown or inconclusive Control measures Measures applied: movement control inside the country, vaccination in response to the outbreak (s), screening, quarantine, official disposal of carcasses, by-products and waste, zoning, disinfection, disinfestations, process to inactivate the pathogenic agent in products or by-products, treatment of affected animals ( ) Measures to be applied: no other measures Diagnostic test results Laboratory name and type / Species / Test / Test date / Result All-Russian Research Institute for Animal Health (FGBI-ARRIAH) (National laboratory) / Cattle / polymerase chain reaction (PCR) / 9 Jun 2017 / Positive Future reporting The event is continuing. Weekly follow-up reports will be submitted. [The location of the outbreak can be seen on the interactive map included in the OIE report at the source URL above.] -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail [There are currently 2 main clusters of LSD in the Eastern Hemisphere: a western one in south-east Europe and an eastern one, which started in July 2014 in the Caucasus region, initially in Azerbaijan, followed next year [2015] by other regional countries such as Chechnya, Dagestan, Georgia, Armenia and South Ossetia, continuing later to Russia's southern oblasts (e.g. Stavropol, Krasnodar, Tambov, Voronezh). The disease has spread also further eastwards, penetrating Kazakhstan. For detailed and recent (since Jan 2016) geographic presentation of the LSD outbreaks in the eastern cluster, please go to OIE's interactive map at (click on the eastern cluster, zoom in). The countries in the eastern LSD region benefit from the diagnostic and vaccine-testing capacities of All-Russia's FGBU (\"Federal Center for Animal Health\", animal health Institute). The vaccine used against LSD in Russia and in its partners is a live attenuated, freeze-dried sheep pox vaccine (details in http://promedmail.org/post/20170511.5028821). - Mod.AS A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  .] [", "POLIOMYELITIS UPDATE (10): SYRIA (DEIR AL ZOUR), DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF CONGO, CIRCULATING VACCINE DERIVED POLIOVIRUS, WHO ************************************************************************************************************************** A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases [1] Syria, 5 new suspected cases - Media report [2] Syria - WHO update 13 Jun 2017, cVDPV [3] Democratic Republic of Congo - WHO update 13 Jun 2017, cVDPV ****** [1] Syria, 5 new suspected cases - Media report Date: Mon 12 Jun 2017 Source: The New Arab [in Arabic, trans. Mod.NS, edited] A total of 5 new cases of poliomyelitis have been reported in the Deir al-Zour countryside in eastern Syria, amid fears that the disease could become epidemic due to the poor health conditions in the region and the areas controlled by the Islamic State (ISIS) and the Syrian government forces. Sources reported to The New Arab that doctors in the eastern countryside of Deir al-Zour had clinically diagnosed 5 new cases of poliomyelitis, one in Diblan town, 2 in Subikhan town and 2 in Gharibah town. The sources explained that the recorded cases are all based on the clinical symptoms, and the disease is likely to become epidemic if the health situation continues as it is in the region, as the disease is communicable. The areas mentioned above witness a complete absence of the health organizations and UN agencies responsible for fighting poliomyelitis and vaccine distribution, primarily the World Health Organization. [Byline: Jalal Bakour] -- Communicated by: ProMED-MENA [Poliomyelitis is a crippling and potentially deadly infectious disease, which is caused by the poliovirus. Earlier in May 2017, tens of cases of suspected poliomyelitis were reported from Deir al-Zour in Syria (Poliomyelitis - Syria: (Deir al Zour) susp, RFI http://promedmail.org/post/20170506.5018204). Later, 3 cases were confirmed to be due to infection with the circulating vaccine-derived polioviruses type 2 (Poliomyelitis - Syria (02): (Deir al Zour) conf. cVDPV http://promedmail.org/post/20170609.5094651). - Mod.NS] [We await further information on this apparent ongoing outbreak of poliomyelitis associated with a circulating vaccine derived poliovirus (cVDPV). A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  . A map of Syria showing provinces/govenorates can be found at:  . - Mod.MPP] ****** [2] Syria - WHO update 13 Jun 2017 cVDPV Date: Tue 13 Jun 2017 Source: WHO Emergencies preparedness, response, Disease Outbreak News (DONs) [edited] Circulating vaccine-derived poliovirus type 2 - Syrian Arab Republic -------------------------------------------------------------------- A circulating vaccine-derived poliovirus type 2 (cVDPV2) outbreak has been confirmed in the Deir Al Zour Governorate of the Syrian Arab Republic. There is evidence of genetic linkage among 3 isolates of type-2 vaccine-derived polioviruses (VDPV2) isolated in the stool specimens of 2 acute flaccid paralysis (AFP) cases with dates of onset of paralysis on [5 Mar and 6 May 2017], and the contact specimen of an AFP case collected on [17 Apr 2017]. Al Mayadeen was also the epi-centre of the wild poliovirus type 1 (WPV1) outbreak in Syrian Arab Republic in 2013. Aggressive multi-country polio outbreak response effectively controlled the WPV1 outbreak and no WPV1 case has been reported in Syrian Arab Republic since [21 Jan 2014]. Public health response Since the confirmation of the 1st VDPV2 during May 2017, AFP surveillance has been intensified in the Governorate, especially in the Al Mayadeen district. As of 6 June 2017, a total of 58 AFP cases have been reported from the Governorate this year [2017]. In addition to the 2 cases that have tested positive for VDPV2, a further 11 have tested negative for polioviruses, with the remaining samples being under process in the laboratories or being transported to the laboratories. Subsequent to the confirmation of the cVDPV2 outbreak, outbreak response planning is underway, including planning for supplementary immunization activities (SIAs) with monovalent oral polio vaccine type 2 (mOPV2), in line with internationally-agreed outbreak response protocols. Although access for vaccination is compromised due to prevailing insecurity in Deir Al Zour, the Governorate has been partially reached by several vaccination campaigns against polio and other vaccine-preventable diseases since the beginning of 2016. Most recently, 2 campaigns have been conducted in March and April 2017 using bivalent oral polio vaccine (bOPV). The most recent full trivalent oral polio vaccine (tOPV) round was conducted in October 2015; while tOPV rounds conducted in the 1st 4 months of 2016 only reached part of the target population of the Deir Al Zour Governorate. It is pertinent to mention that Syrian Arab Republic introduced 2 doses of inactivated polio vaccine (IPV) in the routine infant immunization schedule in 2008. Syrian Arab Republic switched from tOPV to bOPV for routine immunization on 1 May 2016. A detailed risk analysis is currently being updated, including assessing overall population immunity levels and strengthening active searches for additional cases of AFP. Surveillance and immunization activities are being strengthened in neighboring countries as well. WHO risk assessment The detection of cVDPV2 underscores the importance of maintaining high levels of routine vaccination coverage at all levels to minimize the risk and consequences of any poliovirus circulation. Such events also underscore the risk in areas or regions with continued substantial insecurity that hampers maintaining high population immunity through routine vaccination. A robust outbreak response is needed to rapidly stop the VDPV2 transmission. WHO will continue to evaluate the epidemiological situation and outbreak response measures being implemented. WHO advice It is important to complete the ongoing risk assessment as soon as possible to inform the vaccination response with mOPV2 and IPV. The geographical scale of the vaccination response will be in accordance with the findings of the risk assessment. It will be critical to achieve the highest possible coverage during the vaccination response. Given the difficult and challenging security situation in the area, appropriate strategies will be identified and utilized to implement the response. Intensified AFP surveillance should continue. It is important that all countries, in particular those with frequent travel and contacts with polio-affected countries and areas, strengthen surveillance for AFP cases in order to rapidly detect any new virus importation and to facilitate a rapid response. Countries, territories, and areas should also maintain uniformly high routine immunization coverage at the district level to minimize the consequences of any new virus introduction. WHO's International Travel and Health recommends that all travellers to polio-affected areas be fully vaccinated against polio. Residents (and visitors for more than 4 weeks) from infected areas should receive an additional dose of OPV or IPV within 4 weeks to 12 months prior to the travel. As per the advice of an Emergency Committee convened under the International Health Regulations (2005), efforts to limit the international spread of poliovirus remains a Public Health Emergency of International Concern (PHEIC). Countries affected by poliovirus transmission are subject to Temporary Recommendations. To comply with the Temporary Recommendations issued under the PHEIC, any country infected by poliovirus should declare the outbreak as a national public health emergency and consider vaccination of all international travellers. -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail rapporteur Marianne Hopp ****** [3] Democratic Republic of Congo - WHO update 13 Jun 2017, cVDPV Date: Tue 13 Jun 2017 Source: WHO Emergencies preparedness, response, Disease Outbreak News (DONs) [edited] Circulating vaccine-derived poliovirus type 2 - Democratic Republic of the Congo --------------------------------------------------------------------------------- In the Democratic Republic of the Congo (DRC), 2 separate circulating vaccine-derived poliovirus type 2s (cVDPV2s) have been confirmed. The 1st cVDPV2 strain has been isolated from 2 acute flaccid paralysis (AFP) cases from 2 districts in Haut-Lomami province, with onset of paralysis on [20 Feb and 8 Mar 2017]. The 2nd cVDPV2 strain has been isolated from Maniema province, from 2 AFP cases (with onset of paralysis on [18 Apr and 8 May 2017]) and a healthy contact in the community. Public health response The Ministry of Health, supported by WHO and partners of the Global Polio Eradication Initiative (GPEI), has completed a risk assessment, including evaluating population immunity and the risk of further spread. Outbreak response plans are currently being finalized, consisting of strengthening surveillance, including active case searching for additional cases of AFP, and supplementary immunization activities (SIAs) with monovalent oral polio vaccine type 2 (mOPV2), in line with internationally-agreed outbreak response protocols. Surveillance and immunization activities are being strengthened in neighboring countries. WHO risk assessment WHO assesses the risk of further national spread of these strains to be high, and the risk of international spread to be medium. The detection of cVDPV2s underscores the importance of maintaining high routine vaccination coverage everywhere, to minimize the risk and consequences of any poliovirus circulation. These events also underscore the risk posed by any low-level transmission of the virus. A robust outbreak response as initiated is needed to rapidly stop circulation and ensure sufficient vaccination coverage in the affected areas to prevent similar outbreaks in the future. WHO will continue to evaluate the epidemiological situation and outbreak response measures being implemented. WHO advice It is important that all countries, in particular those with frequent travel and contacts with polio-affected countries and areas, strengthen surveillance for AFP cases in order to rapidly detect any new virus importation and to facilitate a rapid response. Countries, territories and areas should also maintain uniformly high routine immunization coverage at the district level to minimize the consequences of any new virus introduction. WHO's International Travel and Health recommends that all travellers to polio-affected areas be fully vaccinated against polio. Residents (and visitors for more than 4 weeks) from infected areas should receive an additional dose of OPV or inactivated polio vaccine (IPV) within 4 weeks to 12 months of travel. As per the advice of the Emergency Committee convened under the International Health Regulations (2005), efforts to limit the international spread of poliovirus remains a Public Health Emergency of International Concern (PHEIC). Countries affected by poliovirus transmission are subject to Temporary Recommendations. To comply with the Temporary Recommendations issued under the PHEIC, any country infected by poliovirus should declare the outbreak as a national public health emergency and consider vaccination of all international travellers. -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail rapporteur Marianne Hopp [The WHO updates released today [Tue 13 Jun 2017] contain the same information as carried on the Global Polio Eradication Initiative website and posted previously (see Poliomyelitis update (09): Syria (DY), conf. cVDPV http://promedmail.org/post/20170608.5093275 and Poliomyelitis update (08): global (Congo DR cVDPV) http://promedmail.org/post/20170526.5064449). I have chosen to repeat these as a reminder that while WPV1 has been identified only in Pakistan and Afghanistan during 2017, the presence of cVDPV2 in 2 geographically separated countries - Syria in the Middle East, and the Democratic Republic of the Congo in Central Africa is a reminder that the polio eradication effort is having setbacks related to reversion of the type 2 attenuated vaccine virus contained in the oral poliovirus vaccine (OPV) to a more neurovirulent virus that can produce paralytic disease. In both countries, the outbreaks are occurring in areas with suboptimal vaccination coverages. In Syria, the area involved is an area with prolonged civil unrest, in a governorate that borders with Iraq. In the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the provinces involved are adjoining, and are located in the southeastern section of the country, with Haut-Lomamo having been a former district of Katanga province, gaining provincial status in 2015. In the media report above, there is mention of 5 newly identified AFP (acute flaccid paralysis) cases in Deir Al Zour, Syria that are pending laboratory confirmation. As the WHO report mentions, of the 58 previously reported AFP cases, only 14 have had laboratory analyses with 3 identifying cVDPV2 isolates, 11 not identifying any poliovirus, and the remaining 41 cases still pending laboratory analyses. Presumably the 5 cases mentioned in the media report in section [1] are in addition to the 58 cases mentioned in the WHO report. We await further laboratory results, and updates. The HealthMap/ProMED maps can be found at: Syria: DR Congo: and a map showing the proposed new provinces of the Congo DR can be found at:  . - Mod.MPP A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  .] [", "ASIAN GREENING, CITRUS - TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO: FIRST REPORT ********************************************************** A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Sat 10 Jun 2017 Source: Trinidad and Tobago Guardian [edited] A citrus disease that has killed and destroyed more than 100 million trees worldwide has been detected in T&T [Trinidad and Tobago]. [It] is called huanglongbing (yellow dragon disease), HLB or citrus greening, [and] has been identified in more than 40 countries. In the Caribbean, Jamaica and Belize have been severely affected. Farmers want to know if this is the reason why the Ministry of Agriculture [MoA] has stopped the sales of citrus plants at its 3 nurseries. The T&T Cooperative Citrus Growers Association's Felix Clarke said, \"I made a report to the MoA [about] a sighting of HLB, [but] nothing has happened. They're sitting on a problem that has the potential to destroy the remaining citrus crops in the country.\" A laboratory was set up in St Augustine with screen houses to produce viral-free and high-quality planting material, but was still not operational. [Byline: Charles Kong Soo] -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail [Greening is one of the most damaging diseases of citrus crops affecting leaves and fruit. It is caused by fastidious phloem-inhabiting bacteria classified as _Candidatus_ Liberibacter asiaticus (Asian greening; huanglongbing, HLB), africanus (including a subsp. capensis; African greening), or americanus (South American greening). The 3 pathogens can only be distinguished by molecular methods. Symptoms include blotchy mottling and yellowing of leaves and small, irregularly shaped fruits with a thick, pale peel, and bad taste. Early symptoms may be confused with nutrient deficiencies. Affected trees become stunted, bear multiple off-season flowers, and may live for only a few years without ever bearing usable fruit. The diseases are restricted to _Citrus_ and close relatives because of the narrow host range of their psyllid vectors. _Ca._ L. asiaticus and americanus are spread by the Asian citrus psyllid (_Diaphorina citri_). The main vector for _Ca._ L. africanus is the African citrus psyllid _Trioza erytreae_. The pathogens can also be spread by grafting and possibly by seed from infected plants or transovarially in the vectors. Both pathogens and vectors can be spread with plant material. Disease management requires an integrated approach including use of clean planting and grafting stock, elimination of inoculum, use of pesticides for vector control in orchards, and biological control of vectors in non-crop reservoirs. Alternative management approaches, such as detection of infected trees by sniffer dogs and cultural control by interplanting with non-host crops, are being trialled. In areas where a pathogen has not yet been detected, biological control of vectors has been used successfully to reduce insect numbers and, therefore, the risk of greening outbreaks (for example, see ProMED-mail post http://promedmail.org/post/20090601.2034). Maps Trinidad & Tobago: and Caribbean with location of Trinidad & Tobago: Pictures Asian greening (HLB) symptoms: Asian & African greening, symptoms and vector photo galleries:  and _Ca._ L. asiaticus in host phloem, microscopy: _D. citri_: Links Citrus greening information:  ,  , and Asian greening, information and distribution: African greening, information and distribution: Taxonomy of Liberibacter species via: Taxonomy and information for psyllid vectors (with pictures) via:  and - Mod.DHA] [", "HEPATITIS A - USA (09): (CALIFORNIA) SECOND COUNTY, REQUEST FOR INFORMATION *************************************************************************** A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Wed 14 Jun 2017 Source: Outbreak News Today [edited] Santa Cruz County [California] is experiencing an increase in new cases of hepatitis A infection, according to county health officials. The county usually has 1-2 confirmed cased per year. In the last 7 weeks the county has received 9 confirmed cases. These newly identified cases share one or more of the following characteristics: illicit drug use (injection and non-injection), homelessness, and/or dense living conditions. Of concern is the fact that there have been recent, serious and widespread outbreaks of hepatitis A in similar identified populations in other counties (such as San Diego County). To address this concern the county has been conducting vaccination clinics in the community and working with partners in an effort to reach those most at risk. \"We are partnering with the community to ensure the people most at risk, particularly the homeless, have access to the hepatitis A vaccine,\" said Arnold S Leff, MD, County Public Health Officer. \"We've increased our outreach to vulnerable populations and have worked to make information available. We are strongly encouraging people who are at risk to check with their health care providers and get vaccinated for hepatitis A.\" To prevent the spread of hepatitis A infection: get the hepatitis A vaccination; wash your hands frequently, especially after using the bathroom or changing diapers, and before handling food; do not have sex with someone who has a hepatitis A infection; use your own towels, toothbrushes, and eating utensils; and don't share food, drinks, or smokes with other people. -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail [It is interesting that San Diego County and Santa Cruz County are about 400 miles (644 km) apart, with San Diego in southernmost California bordering Mexico and Santa Cruz just south of San Francisco. Clearly the underlying potential risk factors seem similar and it would be quite interesting to know if the genetic evaluation of the viruses from both counties, if available, is identical or not. ProMED awaits more information regarding these cases as well as whether other California counties are seeing an upswing in hepatitis A cases. - Mod.LL The state of California can be located on the HealthMap/ProMED-mail interactive map at . A county map can be seen at  . - Sr.Tech.Ed.MJ] [", "FOODBORNE ILLNESS - IRAQ (02) : (NINEVEH) INTERNALLY DISPLACED PERSONS CAMP, FATAL ********************************************************************************** A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases [1] Date: Wed 14 Jun 2017 Source: EpiCore Global Surveillance Project [edited] The Ministry of Health in Kurdistan has confirmed the deaths of a child and an adult woman due to this outbreak and many admitted cases for vomiting, diarrhea, and dehydration. A dinner meal (Iftar) was suspected to be the vehicle, which was distributed by a local restaurant. Epidemiological investigation is ongoing, testing food samples, patients samples, [in addition to the] legal investigation. _Staphylococcus aureus_ is suspected. -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail ***** [2] Date: Tue 13 Jun 2017 Source: EpiCore Global Surveillance Project [edited] Please refer to the website below of a WHO Iraq press release related to the outbreak. [We will provide you with any further update].  : WHO and health authorities immediately investigate suspected cases of foodborne illness in Hassan Sham U2 camp ---------------------------------------------------------------------- The WHO, in coordination with Erbil and Ninewa Directorates of Health, rapidly responded to a suspected foodborne illness outbreak in Hassan Sham U2 camp by conducting an investigation with the aim of identifying the source and cause of the outbreak, treating those who are ill as well as containing and preventing any spread. On 12 Jun 2017 at approximately 21:00, the Directorate of Health of Erbil received notification of suspected foodborne disease in Hassan Sham U2 IDP [internally displaced persons] camp, west of Erbil. Together with Erbil health authorities, an investigation team was dispatched to the field. 825 cases have been reported, of these 638 were referred to various health facilities; 386 cases have been admitted to hospitals in Erbil. Currently no deaths have been documented. The affected communities are mainly internally displaced people from west Mosul, of whom 1/3 of all the cases were children and 2/3 were female. Stool and food samples have been collected and transported to Central Public Health Laboratory in Erbil for further analysis. The majority of the cases predominately presented with vomiting, abdominal pain, and diarrhea, consistent with foodborne illness. All patients referred to health facilities have rapidly improved on supportive medical treatment. Critical outbreak response measures ----------------------------------- - 94 ambulances dispatched to the camp to support the transfer of patients to various hospitals where they could receive prompt emergency care and supportive treatment; - IV fluids, oral rehydration salts, and cannulas have been dispatched to the health facilities to urgently respond to the needs; - food and stool samples have been sent to Central Public Health Laboratory in Erbil; - a WHO medical team visited the camp and Central Emergency hospital in Erbil to conducted additional investigations; - health partners: International Medical Corps, ADRA [Adventist Development and Relief Agency], International Organization for Migration, M\u00e9decins Sans Fronti\u00e8res, and Barazani Charity Foundation are effectively identifying and managing cases; The Ministry of Health will communicate the findings of the laboratory investigations and report to all health partners and stakeholders in Iraq. In light of this event, Erbil Directorate of Health further reiterates its earlier instruction to all camp managers to avoid any distribution of hot meals to IDPs. -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail [ProMED thanks members of the EpiCore Global Surveillance Project for their contributions. Both postings above report diarrhea in addition to vomiting. Staphylococcal enterotoxin-related gastrointestinal illness generally does not produce diarrhea. We look forward to additional information. - Mod.LL A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  .] [", "CHOLERA, DIARRHEA AND DYSENTERY UPDATE (52): AFRICA, ASIA ********************************************************* A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases In this update Africa [1] Cholera - Sudan [2] Cholera - Kenya (Nairobi) Asia [3] Cholera - Nepal (Lalitpur district) ****** [1] Cholera - Sudan Date: Tue 13 Jun 2017 Source: reliefweb, a Radio Dabanga report [edited] Amid reports of hundreds of people who died from cholera in the past month [May 2017], doctors and activists say the Sudanese government and international relief agencies are not giving the aid and attention needed. The National Epidemiological Corporation reported the death of 820 people and the infection of more than 23 766 people with cholera since the start of May 2017. The newest report by the team of researchers, released on [Sun 11 Jun 2017], recorded 192 new cases of cholera in White Nile state: in Kosti, Wedelkaki, Rabak, El Jebelein and El Duweim. Reportedly 12 people died and 330 people were infected with cholera in both El Gedaref and Um Garkur refugee camps. As many as 3 people died of cholera in Northern state and 23 others were infected with cholera in both El Bargeig and El Mahas areas. There were 20 new cholera patients recorded in Red Sea state hospitals. On [Sun11 Jun 2017], 5 people died and 10 others were infected with cholera at Kambo El Kamayin, in El Haji Abdallah which is in the south of El Gezira. In Khartoum, 3 people died at El Banjadeed Hospital, while in the entire state a total 249 cases were recorded in 5 hospitals. In Khartoum Bahri (North), the emergency room in El Ezba district witnessed the death of 17 patients starting 2 weeks ago. The number of infected cases has run-up to 250. The Darfur Relief and Documentation Centre (DRDC) stated on [Mon 12 Jun 2017], that it believes Sudan is a cholera-endemic country \"and all factors for a large-scale pandemic exist\". The rainy season risks transforming the situation into a human tragedy of high proportion in case the epidemic finds its way to the conflict-ridden regions of the country such as Darfur, Blue Nile and the Nuba Mountains.\" The population at risk is \"considerable\" because of poor access to clean water, food sources and optimal sanitation facilities, DRDC stressed. A spokesman for the National Epidemiological Corporation, Dr Ali Bashir told Radio Dabanga that the cholera epidemic \"will affect all the states of Sudan in a month and a half if the current situation is not responded to. The disease spread to 10 states in less than a month and people travel. This leads to the spread of the disease to eastern Sudan, northern Sudan, and North Kordofan. [Also] refugee camps in eastern Sudan are lacking the least services and suffering a terrible deterioration in the environment and water services amid a high density of population.\" Dr Bashir attributed the continued spread of cholera in White Nile and Khartoum to the \"weakness of isolation and safety procedures, the deterioration of health services and poor health awareness of people\". -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail ****** [2] Cholera - Kenya (Nairobi) Date: Fri 9 Jun 2017 Source: Ghetto Radio [edited] One person has been confirmed dead following cholera outbreak in Tassia Embakasi ward. According to Embakasi East sub-county health promotion head Mary Chwayi, 4 cases have been reported in Taasia and Jua Kali areas. Chwayi says the [the] deceased neglected early signs of cholera but the county health officers tried their best to save her life. Residents are now requesting the county government of Nairobi to set up an isolated center to only attend cholera victims. Meanwhile the county government of Nairobi has given 4 days to those selling foods in open places, to desist; failure to which they will be arrested. [Byline: Allan Otieno] -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts ****** [3] Cholera - Nepal (Lalitpur district) Date: Tue 13 Jun 2017, 2:50 AM Source: Himalayan Times [edited] On [Mon 29 May 2017], a 21-year female from Satdobato, Lalitpur with a complaint of watery diarrhea and vomiting was brought to the local polyclinic. Stool culture was found positive for _Vibrio cholera_, commonly known as \"cholera\". The result was reported to the Epidemiology and Disease Control Division (EDCD). Due to the lack of stool sample, cholera could not be verified by EDCD. This is the 1st reported case of cholera in 2017 in Nepal. Over the past few days, there has been a sharp increase in the number of diarrhea cases; most of the stool samples were watery in nature. In 2016, a cholera case was 1st detected in late June. Early detection of cholera is a loud wake-up call for government-concerned bodies, including the general public. In Nepal, every year, cholera cases occur mainly during the monsoon season; it is, thus, expected that, sooner or later, more cholera cases will be detected in Kathmandu or elsewhere in Nepal. Cholera is potentially more life threatening and more epidemic than diarrhea caused by other organisms, thus it remains among the most feared diarrheal illnesses and public health threats in many countries. It is estimated that each year 30 000-40 000 die due to diarrheal diseases in Nepal, of which the majority of deaths occur due to cholera. A toxin release by the bacterium _Vibrio cholera_, causes severe diarrhea and vomiting leading to severe dehydration, shock and even death, if not treated immediately. Death from severe diarrhea is extremely rare in Kathmandu city due to easy access to health care centers. However, beyond the capital, particularly in remote villages; deaths due to severe diarrhea may be more because of difficult geographic terrain, meaning inability to visit health care facilities, and owing to lack of adequate intravenous fluids that are essential for saving life. For example, in 2009 a total of 128 deaths, mostly due to cholera, were recorded in Jajarkot, and the main reason behind the deaths was found to be difficult terrain. Cholera could be life threatening and spread rapidly, even in the city areas, if a new strain of cholera is introduced into the population, because people are not immune to it, and available medicines may not work properly and effectively. Multi-drug resistance is another emerging new challenge and causes difficulty in treating the patient effectively. Appropriate antibiotics or multi drug resistance is determined by the culture method. My previous research showed that cholera having a new biotype is emerging in Nepal, indicating that the currently used medicines may not work properly in the future. It is, however, not yet known how this new biotype will impact the community in the long run. [Byline: Sher Bahadur Pun] -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail [The mortality from cholera and most diarrheal illnesses is related to non-replacement of fluid and electrolytes from the diarrheal illness. As stated in Lutwick LI, Preis J, Choi P: Cholera. In: Chronic illness and disability: the pediatric gastrointestinal tract. Greydanus DE, Atay O, Merrick J (eds). NY: Nova Bioscience, 2017 (in press), oral rehydration therapy can be life-saving in outbreaks of cholera and other forms of diarrhea: \"As reviewed by Richard Guerrant et al (1), it was in 1831 that cholera treatment could be accomplished by intravenous replacement, and, although this therapy could produce dramatic improvements, not until 1960 was it 1st recognized that there was no true destruction of the intestinal mucosa, and gastrointestinal rehydration therapy could be effective, and the therapy could dramatically reduce the intravenous needs for rehydration. Indeed, that this rehydration could be just as effective given orally as through an orogastric tube (for example, refs 2 and 3) made it possible for oral rehydration therapy (ORT) to be used in rural remote areas and truly impact on the morbidity and mortality of cholera. Indeed, Guerrant et al (1) highlights the use of oral glucose-salt packets in war-torn Bangladeshi refugees, which reduced the mortality rate from 30 per cent to 3.6 per cent (4) and quotes sources referring to ORT as \"potentially the most important medical advance\" of the 20th century. A variety of formulations of ORT exist, generally glucose or rice powder-based, which contain a variety of micronutrients, especially zinc (5). \"The assessment of the degree of volume loss in those with diarrhea to approximate volume and fluid losses can be found in ref 6 below. Those with severe hypovolemia should be initially rehydrated intravenously with a fluid bolus of normal saline or Ringer's lactate solution of 20-30 ml/kg followed by 100 ml/kg in the 1st 4 hours and 100 ml/kg over the next 18 hours with regular reassessment. Those with lesser degrees of hypovolemia can be rehydrated orally with a glucose or rice-derived formula with up to 4 liters in the 1st 4 hours, and those with no hypovolemia can be given ORT after each liquid stool with frequent reevaluation.\" References ---------- 1. Guerrant RL, Carneiro-Filho BA and Dillingham RA. Cholera, diarrhea, and oral rehydration therapy: triumph and indictment. Clin Infect Dis. 2003;37(3):398-405. 2. Gregorio GV, Gonzales ML, Dans LF and Martinez EG. Polymer-based oral rehydration solution for treating acute watery diarrhoea. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2009;(2):CD006519. doi: 10.1002/14651858.CD006519.pub2. 3. Gore SM, Fontaine O and Pierce NF. Impact of rice based oral rehydration solution on stool output and duration of diarrhea: meta-analysis of 13 clinical trials. BMJ 1992; 304(6822): 287-91. 4. Mahalanabis D, Choudhuri AB, Bagchi NG, Bhattacharya AK and Simpson TW. Oral fluid therapy of cholera among Bangladesh refugees. Johns Hopkins Med. 1973; 132(4): 197-205. 5. Atia AN and Buchman AL. Oral rehydration solutions in non-cholera diarrhea: a review. Am J Gastroenterol. 2009; 104(10): 2596-604, doi: 10.1038/ajg.2009.329. 6. WHO. The treatment of diarrhea, a manual for physicians and other senior health workers. 4th ed. 2005. - Mod.LL A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  ,  ,  .] [", "TILAPIA SYNCYTIAL HEPATITIS - TAIWAN: (TAOYUAN CITY) EMERGING DISEASE, OIE ************************************************************************** A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: 14 Jun 2017 Source: OIE, WAHID (World Animal Health Information Database), weekly disease information 2017; 30(24) [edited] Tilapia lake virus disease, Chinese Taipei ------------------------------------------ Information received on 14 Jun 2017 from Dr Tai-Hwa Shih, Chief Veterinary Officer, Deputy Director General, Bureau of Animal and Plant Health Inspection and Quarantine Council of Agriculture Executive Yuan, Ministry of Agriculture, Taipei, Chinese Taipei Summary Report type: Immediate notification Date of start of the event: 1 Jun 2017 Date of confirmation of the event: 12 Jun 2017 Report date: 13 Jun 2017 Reason for notification: emerging disease Morbidity: 6.4 percent Mortality: 6.4 percent Zoonotic impact: No Causal agent: Tilapia lake virus (TiLV) New outbreaks (1) Summary of outbreaks: Total outbreaks: 1 Outbreak 1: Pond, Guanyin district, Taoyuan City Date of start of the outbreak: 1 Jun 2017 Outbreak status: continuing (or date resolved not provided) Epidemiological unit: Pond Water type: Fresh water Population type: farmed Production system: semi-closed Affected animals Species / Morbidity / Mortality/ Susceptible / Cases / Deaths / Killed and disposed of / Slaughtered Tilapia (_Oreochromis niloticus_ x _O. aureus_) / 6.4 percent / 6.4 percent/ 150 000 / 9600 / 9600/ 0 / 0 Affected population: Tilapia Epidemiology Source of the outbreak(s) or origin of infection: Unknown or inconclusive Epidemiological comments: The owner of a tilapia farm in Taoyuan City found abnormal mortality (approximately 6.4 percent) in his farmed tilapia since [1 Jun 2017], and then reported the event to the Local Disease Control Center on [6 Jun 2017]. Samples from tilapia with dermal and ocular lesions were collected and sent to the National Laboratory (Animal Health Research Institute) for diagnosis. On [12 Jun 2017], RT-PCR results showed positive reaction to nucleic acid of Tilapia Lake Virus (TiLV) in those samples. Preliminary genetic and phylogenetic analyses of the genomic sequence of segment 3 gene showed the virus shared 93 percent and 92 percent identity with the strains found in Israel in 2014 and Thailand in 2016, respectively. Movement restriction of the index farm has been carried out after the confirmation of TiLV infection. Epidemiological investigation and surveillance of surrounding tilapia farms are being conducted. Control measures Measures applied: disinfection / disinfestations, screening, traceability, quarantine, surveillance outside containment and/or protection zone, official disposal of carcasses, by-products and waste, vaccination permitted (if a vaccine exists), no treatment of affected animals Measures to be applied: no other measures Diagnostic test results Laboratory name and type / Species / Test / Test date / Result Animal Health Research Institute (National laboratory)/ Tilapia (_Oreochromis niloticus_ x _O. aureus_) / reverse transcription - polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) / 12 Jun 2017 / Positive Future reporting The event is continuing. Weekly follow-up reports will be submitted. [The location of the outbreak can be seen on the interactive map included in the OIE report at the source URL above.] -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail [The following comment by Mod.AS, recently published in posting http://promedmail.org/post/20170605.5084485, is applicable here: \"OIE's disease card on the emerging 'Tilapia lake virus\" (TiLV) is available at  . Article 4 in the said card addresses the geographic distribution as follows (references excluded): \"TiLV has been reported in Colombia, Ecuador, and Israel and most recently, Egypt and Thailand. However, a lack of thorough investigation of all mortality incidents means that the geographic distribution of TiLV may be wider than currently [reported]. For example, reports of mortality in tilapia in Ghana and Zambia in 2016 have not been attributed to TiLV but the available information does not indicate that the presence of the virus has been investigated. A partial genome from Thailand showed relatively high variation to strains from Israel (around 97 percent nucleotide identity).\" On 26 May 2017, the FAO published an exhaustive special global alert (no. 338) addressing Tilapia lake virus; the document (6 pages) is available at \". - Mod.CRD A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  .] [", "HEPATITIS A - EUROPE, AMERICAS: MSM, WHO ALERT ********************************************** A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Wed 7 Jun 2017 Source: WHO Emergencies preparedness, response, Disease Outbreak News (DONs) [edited] Hepatitis A outbreaks mostly affecting men who have sex with men - European Region and the Americas -------------------------------------------------------------------------------- Between June 2016 and mid-May 2017, an unusual increase in cases of hepatitis A affecting mainly men who have sex with men (MSM) has been reported by low endemicity countries in the European Region, and in the Americas (Chile and the USA). In the European Region, 15 countries (Austria, Belgium, Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, Ireland, Italy, the Netherlands, Norway, Portugal, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, and the United Kingdom) reported 1173 cases related to the 3 distinct multi-country hepatitis A outbreaks as of 16 May 2017. In Chile, 706 hepatitis A cases were reported at national level as of [5 May 2017]. In the USA, the New York City Health Department has noted an increase in hepatitis A cases among MSM who did not report international travel. In low endemicity settings, the WHO recommends hepatitis A vaccination for high-risk groups, such as travelers to endemic areas, MSM, people who inject drugs, and chronic liver disease patients. In intermediate endemicity setting, hepatitis A vaccination can be considered for the whole population, while in high endemicity, infections are common, but the disease is uncommon, hence, the vaccine is not recommended. For MSM the main risk factor is related to sexual transmission, particularly oral-anal sexual contact. Most of the affected countries have routinely recommended hepatitis A vaccine for MSM. This event is of particular concern from a public health perspective because of the current limited availability of hepatitis A vaccine worldwide. In addition, several national and international lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender (LGBT) pride festivals will take place between June and September 2017, including the World Pride Festival in Madrid, Spain between [23 Jun and 2 Jul 2017]. In this regard, WHO requests countries to report to WHO Regional IHR Contact points any unusual increase in the number of hepatitis A cases among MSM. WHO risk assessment ------------------- Infection with hepatitis A virus is typically acute and self-limiting. Hepatitis A infection does not cause chronic liver disease and is rarely fatal. Some patients may develop more severe symptoms which may last up to a few months. The virus is primarily spread when an uninfected (and unvaccinated) person ingests food or water that is contaminated with the feces of an infected person. The virus can also be transmitted through close physical contact with an infectious person, through dirty hands and through sexual contact. In low endemicity countries, reported rates of hepatitis A are low. Disease may occur among adolescents and adults in high-risk groups, such as injecting-drug users, MSM, people travelling to areas of high endemicity, and in isolated populations, such as closed religious communities. So far, no fatalities have been reported in connection with the ongoing outbreaks. It has the potential to spread further to the general population if control measures (vaccination, hygiene, food safety, and safer sex measures) are not implemented. WHO advice ---------- Countries with low endemicity profile for hepatitis A should routinely offer vaccination to individuals at increased risk of hepatitis A and of a serious complications following infection. The recommended risk groups, among others, include men who have sex with men. Vaccination against hepatitis A should be included as part of a comprehensive package of services to prevent and control of viral hepatitis, including health education and measures for outbreak control. Use of hepatitis A vaccine should be preferred for pre- and post-exposure prophylaxis (e.g. for close contacts of acute cases of hepatitis A). Countries may consider single-dose schedule for hepatitis A vaccination to control outbreaks of hepatitis A, especially when vaccine availability is scarce. Public health messaging should be directed at groups at increased risk of hepatitis A and of serious complications from the infection. Information should include advice on prevention - vaccination, hygiene, food safety and safer sex measures. Madrid LGBT World Pride festival -------------------------------- The Madrid LGBT World Pride festival will be held between [23 Jun and 2 Jul 2017] in Spain. Up to 2 million international guests are expected to attend the event. Although the risk for transmission of hepatitis A by food- and water-related routes in Spain is assessed to be low to moderate, the risk of person-to-person sexual transmission of hepatitis A is moderate to high. In Spain, hepatitis A cases reported in 2017 are almost 8 times higher than the average number of cases reported during the same period between the years 2012 and 2016. Most cases are men with ages between 15 to 45 years old, and MSM are the most affected group. Specific recommendations for people attending the LGBT World Pride festival are below. - Before the event: Those attending the event should seek advice from healthcare providers on hepatitis A vaccination, HIV, and other STI prevention measures prior to departure. - During the event: Preventive measures should be reinforced to reduce the risk of sexual and/or food and water borne infections. - After the event: Attendants should contact a healthcare provider if experiencing symptoms suggestive of hepatitis A or STI infection. -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail [Certainly, MSM are at substantial risk for the acquisition of hepatitis A. With the upcoming Madrid World Pride festival, the infection may well spread. Like immunization against the meningococcus prior to Mecca pilgrimage, MSMs going to this festival should all be vaccinated for HAV. WHO does not recommend hepatitis A vaccine in low risk countries for the general population but clusters do occur which can be foodborne as reported in ProMED-mail (20 May 2017 Hepatitis A - UK (03): (Scotland) bakery http://promedmail.org/post/20170520.5050696; 22 Aug 2016 Hepatitis A - USA (10): (VA) fruit smoothies, imported strawberries http://promedmail.org/post/20160822.4431203; 17 Aug 2016 Hepatitis A - USA (09): (HI) frozen scallops http://promedmail.org/post/20160817.4422480; 13 Dec 2015 Hepatitis A - USA (03): (NY) restaurant associated http://promedmail.org/post/20151213.3859789; 06 Dec 2015 Hepatitis A - New Zealand: Chinese frozen berries, alert, recall http://promedmail.org/post/20151206.3843919). As well, currently an on-going outbreak of hepatitis A is occurring in southern California, primarily in a homeless, substance abusing population where the mode of transmission is unclear as 4 deaths have occurred 13 Jun 2017 Hepatitis A - USA (08): (CA) fatal, RFI http://promedmail.org/post/20170613.5102106; 06 Jun 2017 Hepatitis A - USA (07): (CA) fatal http://promedmail.org/post/20170606.5087079). - Mod.LL A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  ,  .] [", "ANTHRAX - ROMANIA (02): (BOTOSANI) BOVINE, HUMAN CONFIRMED ********************************************************** A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Tue 13 Jun 2017 Source: Romania-Insider [edited] A 47-year-old Romanian man diagnosed with anthrax was admitted to the Botosani County Hospital in northern Romania. Health authorities confirmed the diagnosis after lab tests, and other samples were sent for re-evaluation at the Cantacuzino Institute in Bucharest, reports local News.ro. The man is currently in a stable condition and hospitalized in the Department of Infectious Diseases of the County Emergency Hospital, according to representatives of the Botosani Public Health Directorate. He contracted the disease from one of his cows. Anthrax is a serious infectious disease caused by gram-positive, rod-shaped bacteria known as _Bacillus anthracis_, according to information posted on the website of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Although it is rare, people can get sick with anthrax if they come in contact with infected animals or contaminated animal products. Signs and symptoms of anthrax can range from skin sores to vomiting and shock. Rapid treatment with antibiotics can cure most anthrax infections. [Byline: Irina Popescu] -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts [Maps of Romania can be seen at and . Boto\u015fani can be located on the map at . First case confirmed. The 2nd, a 16 year old teenager, has yet to be confirmed although the probability of being anthrax in much firmer. Also this would add weight to the initial diagnosis on the index case, a cow. - Mod.MHJ A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  .] [", "HEMORRHAGIC SEPTICEMIA - KAZAKHSTAN: (KARAGANDA) BOVINE, OIE ************************************************************ A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: 14 Jun 2017 OIE, WAHID (World Animal Health Information Database), weekly disease information 2017; 30(24) [edited] Hemorrhagic septicemia, Kazakhstan ---------------------------------- Information received on [and dated] 14 Jun 2017 from Dr Zhomart Nurkenov, Chairman of Committee of veterinary control and supervision, RSE \"National Reference Center for Veterinary\", Ministry of Agriculture, ASTANA, Kazakhstan Summary Report type: immediate notification Date of start of the event: 1 Jun 2017 Date of confirmation of the event: 8 Jun 2017 Reason for notification: First occurrence of a listed disease Manifestation of disease: clinical disease Causal agent: _Pasteurella multocida_ Nature of diagnosis: clinical, laboratory (basic) This event pertains to a defined zone the country New outbreaks (1) Summary of outbreaks: Total outbreaks: 1 Outbreak 1: Karim Mynbaeva, Korganzhar, Nurinsky, Karaganda Date of start of the outbreak: 1 Jun 2017 Outbreak status: continuing (or date resolved not provided) Epidemiological unit: village Total animals affected: Species / Susceptible / Cases / Deaths / Killed and disposed of / Slaughtered Cattle / 96 / 21 / 21 / 0 / 0 Affected population: Limitations according to the decision of the Akim of Nurinsky district. Outbreak statistics [rates apparent, expressed as percentages] Species / Morbidity rate / Mortality rate / Case fatality rate / Proportion susceptible animals lost* Cattle / 21.88 / 21.88 / 100 / 21.88 *Removed from the susceptible population through death, destruction, and/or slaughter Epidemiology Source of the outbreak(s) or origin of infection: unknown or inconclusive Epidemiological comments: A restriction is introduced, disinfection barriers are established, daily inspections and investigations are carried out. Control measures Measures applied: movement control inside the country, vaccination in response to the outbreak(s), quarantine, zoning, no treatment of affected animals Measures to be applied: no other measures Diagnostic test results Laboratory name and type / Species / Test / Test date / Result National Reference Center for Veterinary Sciences (national laboratory) / cattle / bacteriological examination / 6 May 2016 / Positive Future reporting The event is continuing. Weekly follow-up reports will be submitted. [The location of the outbreak can be seen on the interactive map included in the OIE report at the source URL above.] -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail [\"Hemorrhagic septicemia is a highly fatal bacterial disease [ _Pasteurella multocida_ subsp. _multocida_] seen mainly in cattle and water buffalo. In susceptible animals, the clinical signs often progress rapidly from dullness and fever to death within hours. Because the disease develops so quickly, few animals can be treated in time, and recovery is rare. Subclinical carriers can introduce hemorrhagic septicemia into a herd. Young animals are mainly affected in endemic regions, and outbreaks are particularly common during rainy weather, when the organism can spread readily. In areas where cattle have no immunity, severe disease is expected to occur in all ages.\"  . Kazakhstan previously reported hemorrhagic septicemia in June 2015, in May and Sep 2016, in other zones of the country. All events have been communicated as resolved. See map of Kazakhstan at  . - Mod.CRD A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  .] [", "MEASLES UPDATE (32): AFRICA, EUROPE, ASIA, USA ********************************************** A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases In this update: Africa --- [1] Kenya (Dadaab Refugee Camp, Garissa County) [2] South Africa (Western Cape) Europe --- [3] UK (South Wales): alert [4] UK (Wales): alert [5] Portugal [6] Romania Asia --- [7] Bhutan, Maldives: elimination, WHO USA --- [8] Minnesota ****** Africa --- [1] Kenya (Dadaab Refugee Camp, Garissa County) Date: Thu 1 Jun 2017 Source: UN Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA), ReliefWeb, UN Children's Fund's (UNICEF)report [edited] UNICEF Kenya responds to measles outbreak in Dadaab Refugee Camp - Over 61 000 children immunized: 12 cases reported, no deaths ---------------------------------------------------------------------- Kenya is working with the Government and partners to strengthen immunization against measles. In April 2017, the 1st confirmed cases of measles, a leading cause of death among young children, were reported in Kenya. The cases were recorded in the Dadaab Refugee Camp in Garissa County affecting children under 5, who were part of a group of new arrivals from Somalia. The vaccination status of these children and many others who are fleeing conflict and drought in the region is unknown. This has put the health of those in the camp and the host community at risk. Dadaab currently hosts over 250 000 refugees from Somalia and other countries neighbouring Kenya. A total of 12 cases of measles have been reported to date with no deaths recorded. The main risk factor for the outbreak is the new incoming refugees from Somalia. Kenya has recorded a high immunization coverage due to the highly successful national measles and rubella immunization campaign carried out in May 2016, which reached over 20 million children. A risk analysis undertaken by the Kenya Ministry of Health in late April [2017] shows a high routine vaccination coverage of 95 percent in the refugee camp. To respond to the current outbreak, UNICEF has supported the Ministry of Health and the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) in carrying out an integrated measles vaccination campaign in the camp that also included the Malezi Bora interventions such as deworming, vitamin A supplementation, screening and treatment referrals for cases of malnutrition, and other medical conditions. The campaign targeted all children aged 6-59 months in the camp and new arrivals aged 5-14 years. The immunization campaign concluded on 23 May [2017] was carried out in Hagadera, Ifo, Ifo 2, and Dagahaley camps that are part of the larger Dadaab refugee compound. A total of 61 755 children aged 6-59 months and 184, aged 5-14 years, were successfully vaccinated. In addition to mobilizing resources for this important exercise, UNICEF provided extensive technical support including quality assurance in the transportation and administering of the vaccines, and the provision of advocacy, communication and social mobilization assistance to the Ministry of Health and UNHCR. The Representative of UNICEF in Kenya, Werner Schultink, says, \"We are working hand-in-hand with the Government and other partners to ensure that the measles outbreak is contained and that all children are immunized against the disease. The consequences of measles are very severe and children can die from it. That is why we are now making arrangements to extend the vaccination campaign to the host community, to ensure that all children at risk are covered as a matter of urgency.\" An integrated measles mop-up vaccination campaign targeting host community counties neighbouring Dadaab is expected to begin in the coming weeks of June 2017. This will take place in 3 sub-counties in Garissa and 2 in Wajir County. The strategy during the activity will be to immunize all children aged 6-59 months against measles and all under ones to receive all their scheduled vaccinations, to improve the general routine immunization coverage in the host community. UNICEF is working with the Government, UNHCR, WHO, and other partners to continue strengthening the immunization of children in Dadaab, the host community and those coming from Somalia, as well as to establish a coordination mechanism to support effective response to the measles outbreak. -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts [Maps of Kenya can be seen at and  . - Mod.LK] ****** [2] South Africa (Western Cape) Date: Mon 12 Jun 2017 20:22 SAST Source: SABC News [edited] The Western Cape [South Africa] Health Department has urged all parents to take their children for a measles vaccination irrespective of their immunisation status. This follows the launch of a national campaign which will run until the end of the month [June 2017]. Earlier this year [2017] 29 cases of measles were reported in Stellenbosch and thousands of children in and around the Boland town were vaccinated. Department spokesperson Jo-Anne Otto, says parents need to ensure that their children are protected. \"What this is, is just a booster shot again. In the February and March [2017] outbreak not all less than 5 year olds went for the vaccination. It was mostly those kids who were at risk, who were living close to the area the outbreak happened. So this is an opportunity for all parents to take their kids for a follow-up vaccination,\" says Otto. -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail [Maps of South Africa can be seen at and . - Mod.LK] ****** Europe --- [3] UK (South Wales): alert Date: Tue 13 Jun 2017 11:13 BST Source: Heart [edited] Public Health Wales is investigating an outbreak of measles in South Wales. The outbreak is small and doctors think it's linked to a school in Newport. They're urging parents to make sure their children have received 2 doses of the MMR [measles, mumps, rubella] vaccine. It comes after a fatal outbreak of measles in South West Wales between 2012 and 2013 which saw more than 1200 cases of measles in around Swansea. 88 people ended up in hospital and 1 person died. Dr Tom Porter, Consultant in Public Health Medicine in Cardiff and Vale said: \"We know that around 1 in 7 children and young people in Cardiff and the Vale of Glamorgan are currently not fully protected against measles. \"We would urge parents to check that their children have had 2 doses of MMR and, if not, to contact your GP surgery to make an appointment for vaccination.\" Around 1 in 10 children with measles end up in hospital; in rare cases it can be fatal. -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail [Maps of Wales can be seen at  and  . - Mod.LK] ****** [4] UK (Wales): alert Date: Fri 9 Jun 2017 12:20 BST Source: Daily Post [edited] Parents snubbing vaccine in late 1990s leaving young adults vulnerable to disease during summer months. Students are being told to see their doctor before attending festivals if they discover a rash. Welsh health officials issued the warning after dozens of young people fell seriously ill with measles returning from events. They said adolescents who haven't been vaccinated posed a risk passing the disease on to others. Doctors are blaming parents for failing to get their children immunised following a controversial health scare in the late 1990s. It is estimated that as many as 45 000 Welsh children were not inoculated against measles. Those who were not given the MMR (measles, mumps and rubella) jab as toddlers are at high risk of contracting the disease. Last year's [2016] festival season saw a significant increase in measles cases in young people, with 52 confirmed as being linked to music festivals. Heather Lewis, consultant in health protection for Public Health Wales, said: \"Anyone who has a rash that could be measles is urged not to attend events where unvaccinated people could be present. \"People who are not vaccinated not only risk catching measles themselves, but could also pass it to babies too young to have received MMR or those who cannot be vaccinated for medical reasons and who are at risk of serious complications.\" [Byline: Zara Whelan] -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts [Young adults who were never immunized with MMR vaccine are at risk when they attend events that attract large crowds, such as concerts and sporting events. They are also at risk when living in close quarters such as dormitories. They are advised to talk with their GP about getting vaccinated. - Mod.LK] ****** [5] Portugal Date: Wed 7 Jun 2017 11:48 Source: Diario de Noticias (DN) Sociedade [in Portuguese, machine trans., edited] Measles surveillance continues at \"high alert level\". The number of confirmed cases of measles in Portugal this year [2017] has risen to 31. Epidemiological surveillance of measles remains in \"high alert level\", despite the epidemic activity being considered controlled in the region of Lisbon and Tagus Valley, today [7 Jun 2017] announced the Director-General of Health (DGS). As a result of the joint work among all organizations and at all levels of the national health service and also due to the collaboration of the dependent services of the ministry of education, the epidemic of measles activity initiated in February 2017 is now considered controlled also in the region of Lisbon and Tagus Valley\", affirms the DGS said in a statement. According to DGS, \"a new case was recorded in May [2017] in the Alentejo region, imported from Romania, without any relationship with the known transmission chains in Lisbon and Tagus Valley and in the Algarve.\" \"All preventive measures were adopted against\" this case, affirms the DGS in a \"public statement on the epidemic activity of measles in Portugal,\" in which it stresses that \"the success achieved is the result of efforts undertaken collectively.\" However, it stresses that the health authorities are still at a \"high alert\" level, as pertains to the epidemiological surveillance\" of the illness. The number of confirmed cases of measles this year [2017] in Portugal climbed to 31, from a total of 158 notifications, according to the DGS. According to the last update of data available on the website of the DGS, more than half of the cases (61 percent) occurred in unvaccinated people, 42 percent in health professionals and almost half (45 percent) of confirmed cases required hospitalization. The epidemiological Bulletin of the DGS indicates that the region of Lisbon and Tagus Valley is one that features more confirmed cases (22), 12 of which were in unvaccinated people, and 1 death. 8 of the 22 confirmed cases in the region of Lisbon and Tagus Valley needed hospitalization, but all patients were already discharged. In the Algarve region, the DGS recorded 7 confirmed cases of measles, 5 of which were not vaccinated. 4 of the cases occurred in children aged less than 1 year ... In addition to the imported case registered in the Alentejo region, the DGS recorded another imported case in the northern region, of a child who was not vaccinated and needed to be hospitalized, but has already been discharged from hospital. Last April [2017], after the death of a young man of 17 years with measles, the Government issued an order forcing schools to report to health delegates any students who didn't have vaccines, according to the National Vaccination Programme (PNV). ... -- Communicated by: Kathryn Soderholm and ProMED-ESP [Also see George F, Valente J, August GF, et al: Measles outbreak after 12 years without endemic transmission, Portugal, February to May 2017. Euro Surveill. 2017; 22(23): pii=30548; Abstract -------- We report a measles outbreak in 2 Portuguese health regions (Algarve and Lisbon and Tagus Valley) since February 2017, and which by 31 May 2017, resulted in 28 confirmed cases, of which 16 were unvaccinated. 13 cases were healthcare workers. One unvaccinated teenager died. Genotype B3 was identified in 14 cases from both regions. This outbreak occurs after 12 years without endemic measles transmission, and in a context of high measles vaccination coverage and immunity. Maps of Portugal can be seen at andhttp://healthmap.org/promed/p/42>. - Mod.LK] ****** [6] Romania Date: Mon 12 Jun 2017 Source: Outbreak News Today [edited] In a follow-up to the large measles outbreak in Romania, health officials put the outbreak total to 6743 cases from 1 Jan 2016 through 9 Jun 2017. Cases continue to be reported despite ongoing response measures that have been implemented at national level through reinforced vaccination activities. Cases have been reported from all the country's 41 counties, or judetes. In addition, health officials put the measles death toll at 30. The most deaths have been reported in Timis (8), Dolj (6), and Arad (5). Some previous and ongoing measles outbreaks in other EU/EEA countries have been epidemiologically linked to the current outbreak in Romania. Measles is a highly contagious respiratory disease caused by a virus that is spread by direct contact with nasal or throat secretions of infected people. Symptoms generally appear in two stages. In the 1st stage, which lasts 2-4 days, the individual may have a runny nose, cough, and a slight fever. Eyes may become reddened and sensitive to light while the fever gradually rises each day, often peaking as high as 103-105 deg F [39.4-40.6 deg C] F. Small bluish white spots surrounded by a reddish area may also appear on the inside of the mouth. The 2nd stage begins on the 3rd to 7th day and consists of a red blotchy rash lasting 5-6 days. The rash usually begins on the face and then spreads downward and outward, reaching the hands and feet. The rash fades in the same order that it appeared, from head to extremities. A person can spread measles from 4 days before the onset of rash through 4 days after the rash begins. Although measles is usually considered a childhood disease, it can be contracted at any age. The single best way to prevent measles is to be vaccinated. Individuals should receive 2 doses of MMR vaccine to be protected. [Byline: Robert Herriman] -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts [Maps of Romania can be seen at and . - Mod.LK] ****** Asia --- [7] Bhutan, Maldives: elimination, WHO Date: Tue 13 Jun 2017 Source: UN Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA), ReliefWeb, WHO report [edited] Bhutan, Maldives eliminate measles ---------------------------------- Bhutan and Maldives have eliminated measles, a highly infectious disease that is a major childhood killer globally. The 2 countries have become the 1st in WHO South-East Asia Region to be verified for having interrupted endemic measles virus transmission, ahead of the 2020 regional target. \"Bhutan and Maldives have demonstrated how a highly contagious virus like measles can be eliminated. WHO commends them for this momentous public health achievement,\" Dr Poonam Khetrapal Singh, Regional Director of WHO South-East Asia, said, announcing the findings and conclusions of the WHO South-East Asia Regional Verification Commission for Measles Elimination and Rubella control. The Regional Director said, \"The strongest political commitment, alongside the concerted efforts of health workers, officials and partners at all levels, has helped achieve this landmark success, which is a boost to the Region's effort to eliminate measles and control rubella.\" Bhutan and Maldives launched their Expanded Program on Immunization in 1979 and 1976 respectively, and since then worked indefatigably to increase access to immunization services. \"Both countries achieved and maintained high coverage of measles vaccination, despite geographical challenges. They also established strong laboratory-supported surveillance for measles, and have conducted detailed case investigation and tracking, right up to the very last case,\" Dr Khetrapal Singh said. Maldives has not reported any case of indigenous measles since 2009, and Bhutan since 2012. To fortify their progress, both countries have been carrying out mass vaccination campaigns with measles and rubella vaccine covering high-risk populations. \"While endemic measles virus transmission has been interrupted, both Bhutan and Maldives continue to be at risk of measles virus importation. Hence, both countries must continue efforts against measles and rubella and protect high-risk populations to effectively deal with any importations,\" Dr Khetrapal Singh said. Measles elimination and rubella control by 2020 has been one of WHO South-East Asia Region's flagship priority programmes since Dr Khetrapal Singh became Regional Director in February 2014. An estimated 620 000 measles deaths have been averted in 2016 alone following vaccination carried out by Member countries. Nearly 107 million children have been reached with an additional dose of measles vaccine through mass vaccination between 2013 and 2016. All countries have introduced 2 doses of measles containing vaccine and have been making focused efforts and progress against measles and rubella. All countries are conducting case-based surveillance for measles and rubella, and Regional surveillance standards have been revised to meet elimination standards. The measles laboratory network has been expanded from 23 laboratories in 2013 to 39 WHO accredited laboratories in 2016. \"To meet the 2020 measles elimination and rubella control goals, all countries need to make greater efforts to increase measles vaccination coverage through childhood immunization programmes, as nearly 4.7 million children remain unvaccinated against measles in the Region annually,\" Dr Khetrapal Singh said. The overarching goal of universal health coverage and the core Sustainable Development Goal theme of leaving no one behind provide new opportunities to further improve immunization programmes, enhance access to new vaccines, and strengthen health systems to sustain the gains made so far, she said. The measles elimination and rubella control strategy in WHO South-East Asia Region is based on four key approaches -- achieving and maintaining at least 95 percent vaccination coverage with 2 doses of measles and rubella vaccine through routine and supplementary immunization; developing and sustaining a sensitive case based surveillance that meets recommended performance indicators; developing and maintaining an accredited measles and rubella laboratory network; and strengthening support and linkages for these strategies. -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail [At the same time that we see measles cases increasing in incidence in USA and Europe, Bhutan and the Maldives are to be congratulated on achieving measles eradication. Maps of Bhutan can be seen at  and  and of the Maldives at  and  . - Mod.LK] ****** USA --- [8] Minnesota Date: Mon 5 Jun 2017 Source: Digital Journal [edited] Right now, there are more measles cases in Minnesota than there were in all of the United States in 2016. This was caused by anti-vaxxers spreading a debunked rumor through the state's large Somali-American community that the vaccine causes autism. In early May [2017], Digital Journal reported Minnesota Health Department officials were scrambling to contain a measles outbreak that had mainly affected Somali-American children. At that time, 44 cases of the highly contagious disease had been identified, mostly in Hennepin County. According to The Verge, Kristen Ehresmann, the director of the Infectious Disease Epidemiology, Prevention, and Control Division at Minnesota's Department of Health said more than 8000 people, mostly in schools and hospitals have been exposed to the virus. Ehresmann pointed out that when fewer people are vaccinated, they put large numbers of the community at risk, particularly those who are too young or sick, adding that \"many of the cases could have been prevented if people had gotten vaccinated.\" Measles is a highly contagious disease that can be fatal. Symptoms usually start with a fever, cough, runny nose, and watery eyes. Then a rash develops that usually spreads from the head to the rest of the body. According to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), 2 doses of the vaccine are about 97 percent effective in preventing the disease. As Digital Journal noted in May [2017], the upsurge in measles cases was primarily limited to the large Somali-American community -- caused by a concerted effort by anti-vaccine groups showing up at community health meetings and distributing pamphlets claiming the measles vaccine caused autism, an unfounded myth that has been proven to be false. Imams and health officials can work together to stop the outbreak ----------------------------------------------------------------- As it turns out, almost half of Somali-American children in Minnesota have not been vaccinated for measles. Adding to concerns -- the holy month of Ramadan has 3 more weeks to go, with numerous gatherings and prayers still to come. Health officials and Muslim religious leaders are facing the challenge of getting through Ramadan without the measles outbreak spreading further. Elham Ashkar, who works on community outreach for Children's Minnesota hospitals and clinics told NPR [National Public Radio] News that \"One of the imams, and I'm paraphrasing, he said, 'If you don't immunize, it's like killing the Muslim children.' I think that's such strong messaging.\" Imams, in their position as religious leaders, can spread the word on the dangers of not vaccinating their followers' children. \"They are a person who can take scripture, Islamic principles, and can also relate that back to how people make health decisions,\" said Ashkar. [Byline: Karen Graham] -- Communicated by: Kathryn Soderholm and ProMED-ESP [A similar report in Spanish can be found at According to , the Minnesota Department of Health now counts the total number of measles cases at 76, of which 64 are in the Somali community. A plan is being put together to reach Somali parents right after Ramadan in July [2017]. Somali health care providers are being recruited, as are parents who have vaccinated their children and other community leaders to talk to parents and their family members. Vaccination with MMR vaccine is extremely important for this community because many Somalis travel to visit relatives in Somalia, and there are widespread measles outbreaks there. The state of Minnesota can be located on the HealthMap/ProMED-mail interactive map at . A county map can be seen at  . - Mod.LK] [", "CARBON MONOXIDE POISONING - USA (02): (NEW YORK CITY) ***************************************************** A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Tue 13 Jun 2017 08:23 PM EDT Source: WABC-TV, Eyewitness News [edited] More than 30 people suffered minor injuries following a carbon monoxide [CO] scare at an apartment building in TriBeCa in Lower Manhattan [New York], fire officials said, and the store manager saved lives by acting quickly to rescue others. [The manager at] the Amish Market on Murray Street where the drama unfolded, said it began as the workers were getting ready for the day. \"I had 25 people down in my prep area,\" he said. \"One fainted. I went down to see why she fainted. By the time I got to the bottom of the steps, my other manager, who was tending to that lady, also fainted. At that split second, somebody else fainted right behind me, and I knew it was carbon monoxide.\" [The manager] is 65 and has leukemia, but he rushed to carry 6 unconscious victims from the basement upstairs. Firefighters responded to the scene around 8:30 Tuesday morning [13 Jun 2017] and immediately began evacuating and treating people. \"We found a defective boiler in the basement with some sort of broken pipe that was producing the CO,\" Chief of Department James Leonard said. The situation was made more tense when people started feeling faint just as a worker opened a package in the basement, stirring worries that the parcel might have been poisonous. NYPD [New York City Police Department], the bomb squad, and FBI investigators were called to the scene, but the box was deemed to be harmless. It turned out to be a salad bowl box delivered on [Mon 12 Jun 2017]. High carbon monoxide readings were detected throughout the 12-story building. The meters measure up to 1000 parts per million, enough to \"render you unconscious very, very quickly,\" Leonard said. The normal level of carbon monoxide in a house can be from under zero to 15 ppm, depending on whether there's a gas stove, according to the US Environmental Protection Agency. The 32 injured people were being treated at area hospitals, but officials said the injuries were all relatively minor. \"Some had passed out, but all of the injuries were consistent with high levels of CO,\" Leonard said. The broken pipe was capped and CO levels decreased by 10:30 a.m. The situation was then declared under control. The basement of the building did not have any carbon monoxide detectors, but also was not required to have any. \"We don't need carbon monoxide detectors,\" Jording said. \"We don't have any gas. We have no need. We have people who come and tell us there was no need to have any carbon monoxide detectors.\" The city's buildings department told Eyewitness News reporter Tim Fleischer that CO detectors are not required in commercial stores or in basements, and they were not required here. According to the store owner, there have been complaints about the building's boiler. \"The boiler of the building has a complete crack in it,\" Pat (last name not provided) said. \"Our kitchen is next to that boiler, and that seems to be a problem.\" Department of Buildings inspectors were on the scene investigating on [Tue 13 Jun 2017] and ordered the building owners to shut down the boiler until further notice. [Byline: Tim Fleischer] -- Communicated by: Denis Green [ProMED-mail thanks Denis Green for his submission. Carbon monoxide is a deadly odorless, colorless gas. This article even notes people were collapsing without any apparent reason. Carbon monoxide is most often the fumes from burning fuel in some type of engine, a car, a small engine, a gas furnace, or as in this case, a boiler. This article points out that CO, carbon monoxide, can build up particularly indoors and be the source of a poisoning of multiple people. Levels in the building were many times what they should have been. In lower doses a person may experience headaches or dizziness or faint. But in other instances the high level can overcome a person with little or no warning. Furthermore, those with heart disease or lung disease may be at more risk of collapsing. Generally, if provided fresh breathing air in a timely manner, the affected individual can recover. However, it doesn't take a long time of breathing high levels of CO to result in death. - Mod.TG A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  .] [", "SCRUB TYPHUS - INDIA (06): INCREASING RECOGNITION ************************************************* A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Wed 14 Jun 2017 Source: The Wire [edited] There is a need for greater awareness of the potentially fatal illness, which is misconceived as an exotic disease only affecting people in rural areas and whose symptoms can be mistaken for dengue, malaria, or typhoid. The disease is prevalent in both rural and urban India. In the coming months, an illness presenting symptoms of dengue, typhoid, severe pneumonia, or multi-organ dysfunction, may, in fact, be scrub typhus \u00ad- be it in Goa or Gorakhpur, Darjeeeling or Delhi, Bikaner or Bellary. In July 2016, a 40-year-old tailor from Bellary district [Karnataka state] had been suffering from fever for 12 days and had been experiencing vomiting for 5 days. He was suspected to have dengue because of his low platelet count. However, tests for dengue were negative and his fever persisted. He also had a painless ulcer with a black scab in the centre (termed an eschar) and made a rapid recovery after oral medication. Last August [2016], a 35-year-old farmer from Chakrata in Uttarakhand had been suffering from fever for 5 days, which was followed by a dry cough and increasing breathlessness. She was diagnosed with pneumonia and treated with antibiotics. However, within the next 2 days, pneumonia progressed and she had to be admitted to the ICU of a hospital near Dehradun [capital of Uttarakhand] where she was put on a ventilator. She had an eschar similar to the 1st patient in her armpit and had a low platelet count with complications in multiple organs. A 65-year-old from Kannur district in Kerala was admitted to a hospital with fever, abdominal pain, breathlessness, renal failure, and an altered level of consciousness -\u00ad suggesting a serious involvement of multiple organs. Her diagnosis was made just in time and she improved, though gradually. All 3 showed different facets of scrub typhus, a re-emerging infectious disease in India, which has been reported from all the areas mentioned above. After several hundreds of cases were seen in Assam during the Second World War, it seemingly disappeared from sight. It, however, resurfaced in the 1990s, causing some fatalities among the cadets of the Indian Military Academy in Dehradun who had trekked in the hills. In the new millennium, clinical researchers familiar with the disease regularly documented cases from Himachal Pradesh and Tamil Nadu, with a few cases even reported in Delhi. In recent years, the scale of the disease has expanded, with a couple of thousand cases reported from most Indian states, mainly from the tertiary care institutions. Investigations into outbreaks of a \"mystery fever\" that caused tens of deaths in a few weeks, in Alwar [Rajasthan state] for example, have also uncovered scrub typhus as the underlying cause. A review of the disease in 2013 noted that \"scrub typhus is probably the single most prevalent, under-recognised, neglected and severe but easily treatable disease in the world.\" I had the opportunity of detecting a large outbreak of this disease in Uttarakhand in 2012, and our study of the seasonality, clinical manifestations and outcomes of scrub typhus was recently published in the Indian Journal of Medical Research. The scale and severity of scrub typhus were daunting and for a period of the year, nearly 1/3 to 1/2 of the ICU beds were occupied by patients suffering from this disease. Even at the Christian Medical College in Vellore, scrub typhus accounts for 36 percent of patients admitted with tropical infections, outnumbering those with malaria and dengue fever. It is time that we become familiar with the facts of this disease and clear some of the misconceptions around it, in order to diagnose it early and prevent its serious complications. Scrub typhus is caused by a bacterium called _Orientia tsutsugamushi_, which is introduced into our bodies from the bites of the infected larvae of a certain kind of mite. The adult mites do not bite, and the larvae -\u00ad which are too small to be seen by the naked eye \u00ad- do so in a painless manner. These larvae are present on blades of grass, small bushes, shrub, and usually bite rats, shrews, or even birds. We become accidental victims during the course of a range of activities \u00ad- cutting grass, collecting fuelwood, walking barefoot, or sitting on the grass. Thus, even city dwellers are at a risk of infection if there happen to be rats around (common sight in both urban and rural areas), and if the grass in their lawn or parks is inhabited by these mite larvae, which explains why some of the occupants of posh colonies of Chandigarh and Delhi developed scrub typhus. Surveys conducted in the Northeast, South India, and North India have shown that 30-50 the population surveyed had been exposed to the organisms which cause scrub typhus. Exposure to infection is therefore common and the disease is probably greatly underreported. The disease may occur to a certain extent throughout the year. However, we found that in northern India, most patients presented with signs of the disease in the months from July to November, which is similar to the seasonal pattern in north-eastern India. In southern India, cases are most frequent in the months from October to February. These months correspond with the increased activity of mites after rains. Scrub typhus is a disease with diverse manifestations and variable severity. It always begins with a fever with non-specific features like a headache or muscle aches and may continue as such, thus being mistaken for dengue, malaria or typhoid. In some patients, after a few days of untreated illness, complications may develop and the patient may present with a cough or shortness of breath, jaundice, abdominal pain, altered consciousness, or a combination of these symptoms. These symptoms are confusing to doctors who may not suspect scrub typhus as the underlying cause. In our study, nearly 1/2 of our patients with scrub typhus presented signs of severe pneumonia and were unresponsive to usually administered antibiotics like penicillin, cephalosporin, or quinolone. This pneumonia was often rapidly progressive, requiring ICU care with mechanical ventilation. Scrub typhus can present like acute encephalitis, and it recently became known that a significant proportion of children suspected of having Japanese encephalitis in Gorakhpur, [Uttar Pradesh], in fact, presented evidence of scrub typhus. This is a subject of further research, and since scrub typhus is treatable, there is hope for reducing the deaths, which until now were being attributed to Japanese encephalitis, for which no curative treatment exists. There is a need for greater awareness of scrub typhus, especially among physicians working at the primary and secondary care levels, and for better availability of diagnostics in the healthcare system. An experienced physician may be able to diagnose scrub typhus with confidence on a physical examination alone if he or she looks carefully for the presence of an eschar, which is an indication of scrub typhus in India and is seen in nearly half the cases. The eschar is an ulcer, 1 to 2 centimetres in size with a black scab in the centre (resembling a cigarette burn), which occurs at the site of the larvae bite, and does not cause pain or itching. This lack of symptoms and the fact that it may be in the armpits, groin or abdomen, means that a cursory examination is not enough and a careful clinical examination is required. Tests which are commonly performed in patients with fever may show low platelets (which can be confused with dengue) and raised liver enzymes. The diagnostic tests for scrub typhus rely on demonstration of antibodies against the organism and may not be positive in the 1st week of illness. Reliable point-of-care tests for scrub typhus, akin to those available for malaria, are an urgent need. The uncertainties involved in the diagnosis of scrub typhus and the time taken for conducting some of the tests may delay the initiation of treatment, which greatly increases the risk of serious complications. The treatment of scrub typhus in its early stages is simple and highly effective and involves drugs like doxycycline and azithromycin, which however should only be given under supervision. Doxycycline should not be taken during pregnancy. The response to an antibiotic effective against scrub typhus is so prompt (within 48 hours) that it constitutes a kind of therapeutic test. As pointed earlier, scrub typhus is not a new but a re-emerging disease in India. The name, scrub typhus, is a bit of a misnomer as it is not limited to scrubland \u00ad- a place where shrubs are the dominant vegetation (one report even referred to it as \"jungle fever\"). It has been reported from a wide variety of habitats from agricultural plains to hills to coastal regions and even deserts. In our study, there were more than 100 patients with scrub typhus from Uttar Pradesh's agricultural belt, where this disease is not commonly suspected or reported. The disease is not limited to rural areas, although rural folk may be at higher risk due to their occupation or living conditions. Some of these misconceptions may lead many \u00ad- including doctors \u00ad- to believe that scrub typhus is an exotic new disease only affecting rural people in the hills or jungles. Some media reports on scrub typhus are also misleading. Scrub typhus is related to rickettsia -\u00ad a group of intracellular organisms transmitted by bites of ticks, lice, fleas or mites. Rickettsial infections include epidemic typhus spread by lice or spotted fever spread by ticks, and these have sometimes been confused by the media with scrub typhus. It was epidemic typhus which killed Napoleon's soldiers and not scrub typhus as reported. This distinction is important as scrub typhus, unlike epidemic typhus, is not contagious. Contact with the mite larvae can be prevented by not sitting or lying directly on the ground, or walking barefoot. Changing the clothes after the day's work and a thorough wash also help. Insect repellent creams may also be protective. Making our homes and surroundings less hospitable to rodents is advisable. Short-term prevention in soldiers and travelers can involve weekly administration of an antibiotic like doxycycline but is not recommended for long-term residents. There is no vaccine for scrub typhus. As the season for scrub typhus approaches, we need to recognise it as a disease prevalent in rural and urban India, which is causing life-threatening illnesses. Doctors should keep this possibility in mind, examine carefully for the presence of eschar in all patients with acute febrile illness, pneumonia, altered consciousness and initiate therapy early in case clinical features are compatible and other diseases have been excluded. Measures to prevent bites are feasible and should be known to people at risk, especially to those who live in rural areas. [Byline: Anurag Bhargava] -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts [ProMED-mail has posted multiple reports of scrub typhus in several Indian states in the past, especially since 2011. For background information, see ProMED-mail post Scrub typhus - India (05): background http://promedmail.org/post/20111208.3546. Maps of India can be seen at  and  . - Mod.ML] [", "LEGIONELLOSIS - USA (06): (FLORIDA) ADULT COMMUNITY, HOT TUB ************************************************************ A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Tue 13 Jun 2017 7:40 PM EDT Source: WFTV [edited] The Florida Health Department tracked 2 cases of legionnaires' disease to a hot tub at a Clermont [Lake County] retirement community. Health investigators are trying to determine if the disease is to blame for the death of a 3rd person. Recently, 2 people at Summit Greens in Clermont tested positive the disease. The cases come on the heels of an unrelated investigation in Orange County where 4 people contracted the disease at 2 LA Fitness gyms. Authorities said the community hot tub at Summit Greens was the source of the bacteria found in the new cases. The hot tub has since been disinfected, but health department officials said people may not be out of the woods yet. They will continue to monitor people here over the next couple of weeks. According to the health department, the 1st case of legionnaires' disease was diagnosed [25 May 2017]. The next day, another person was diagnosed with the _Legionella_ bacteria. Both were residents of the Summit Greens community. After an investigation, authorities narrowed the search down to the hot tub at the clubhouse. The hot tub was closed down [6 Jun 2017]. \"So we are currently working on a 2-to 14-day incubation period. We are urging residents that pretty much from the last day they used the hot tub, they can develop symptoms anywhere from 2 to 14 days after exposure,\" said Giselle Barreto, a government operations consultant with the Florida Department of Health in Lake County. A 3rd individual who showed signs of legionnaires' disease later died, but his tests for the disease were negative. \"We have pursued further testing by having a culture sent to the CDC to ensure that it wasn't one of those other possible types,\" said Barreto. The 2 patients have been treated and released from the hospital. [Byline: Jeff Levkulich] -- Communicated by: Denis Green [ProMED-mail thanks Denis Green for his submission. A hot tub is said to be the source for at least 2 cases of legionnaires' disease at the Summit Greens community in Clermont, Florida, but we are not told in the news report above on what this association was based. Usually a source is confirmed on the basis of matching genotypes for the clinical and environmental isolates of _Legionella_. For a discussion of legionellosis, please see my moderator comments in the prior ProMED-mail posts: Legionellosis - USA (04): (AZ) neonatal, underwater birthing http://promedmail.org/post/20170608.5093537; Legionellosis - USA (03): (FL) spa & showers susp, RFI http://promedmail.org/post/20170422.4987402; Legionellosis - USA (02): (MI) genotyping, RFI http://promedmail.org/post/20170217.4846471; and Legionellosis - USA: (NY) commercial spa pool http://promedmail.org/post/20170107.4747816. Summit Greens is a gated community of 769 homes, with a clubhouse, fitness center, and heated indoor pool in Clermont, Florida ( ). Clermont, with a population of 30 201 residents in 2013, is a city in Lake County, Florida, about 22 miles (35 km) west of the city of Orlando in Orange County ( ). The state of Florida can be located on the HealthMap/ProMED-mail interactive map at . Lake County can be seen on the map at  . - Mod.ML] [", "HEPATITIS A - USA (10): (CALIFORNIA) ADDITIONAL COUNTIES, REQUEST FOR INFORMATION ********************************************************************************* A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases [1] Date: Wed 14 Jun 2017 2:52 PM ET Source: Santa Cruz Patch [edited] In the last 8 weeks, 9 homeless people in their 20s and 30s in Santa Cruz [County, California] have been diagnosed with hepatitis A, constituting an outbreak of the same strain that recently killed 4 people in the San Diego area, Santa Cruz County health officials said [Tue 13 Jun 2017]. Santa Cruz County public health officer Arnold Leff believes the outbreak is connected with a larger one that started in San Diego County in 2016. In November 2016, 2 people were diagnosed with the disease in San Diego County, but as of [Mon 12 Jun 2017], that number had climbed to 160, including 4 deaths and 80 percent of those infected having been hospitalized, Leff said. Normally, Santa Cruz County health officials only see 1 or 2 cases per year. Since April 2017, 5 men aged 25 to 36 and 4 women aged 26 to 30 have been diagnosed. All are unsheltered other than one man who is staying with his mother, Leff said. \"It's close to being defined as an epidemic, but for now we're calling it an outbreak,\" Leff said. Leff said smaller outbreaks had been reported in Plumas County and in Arizona and New York, but that he had no evidence to believe those outbreaks were related. \"When we first got our 1st 2 cases, we did not wait,\" Leff said. \"We started a hepatitis A vaccination program targeted to the most at-risk individuals in hopes of preventing a large-scale outbreak similar to what they have in San Diego.\" The people most at risk of catching hepatitis A are homeless, drug users, men who have sex with men, people with clotting factor disorders, those who live with or care for hepatitis A patients, and anyone traveling to countries with moderate to high rates of hepatitis A. \"Given the 4 deaths they had and the obvious increase in cases in San Diego, we made an aggressive decision to open up our operation center and to treat this outbreak, even though it was initially small, as an urgent outbreak that we needed to respond to,\" Leff said. \"There's no treatment for hepatitis A. Most people do generally pretty well, in the sense that the mortality rate in the average person is only about 3 per 1000,\" Leff said. \"However, anybody with liver disease has a mortality rate that's 10 times higher than that.\" For example, people who already have hepatitis C when they are diagnosed with hepatitis A have a mortality rate of 2.5 or 3 per 100, Leff said. Free vaccinations are being offered to those most at risk for contracting hepatitis A, including drug users and the homeless, at the Santa Cruz Health Center at 1080 Emeline Ave and the Watsonville Health Center at 9 Crestview Drive. \"They are at the most risk of serious consequences if they get Hepatitis A, so we have started a major vaccination program,\" Leff said. \"We're not vaccinating everybody.\" Vaccinations are also available at the Planned Parenthood clinics in Santa Cruz and Watsonville, the Dominican Pediatric Clinic and Women's Health Center in Santa Cruz and Clinica del Valle del Pajaro and Salud Para la Gente in Watsonville. -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail Rapporteur Mary Marshall [The San Diego HAV has been reported as IB and apparently the Santa Cruz strains are IB as well. Both being IB does not definitively link the isolates without more analysis. A short discussion of the virus is shown below extracted from Desbois D, Couturier E, Mackiewicz V, et al: Epidemiology and genetic characterization of hepatitis A virus genotype IIA. J Clin Microbiol 2010; 48(9); 3306-15; doi: 10.1128/JCM.00667-10;  . The citations can be found at the original URL: Despite significant genetic variability, a single serotype has been described (13). Sequence variation of a 168-nucleotide fragment encompassing the VP1/2A junction has initially defined seven genotypes that differ by at least 15 percent and subtypes that differ by 7.0 to 7.5 percent (19). 6 HAV genotypes (genotypes I to VI) are now defined based on analysis of the 900 nucleotides of the complete VP1 protein (6). Genotypes I, II, and III, divided into subtypes A and B, infect humans. The former genotype VII has been reclassified within the genotype II clade as subgenotype IIB (6, 14). Data on genotype distribution showed that genotype I was the most prevalent worldwide, with IA being reported more frequently than IB, and that subgenotype IIIA was prevalent in Central Asia (6, 16, 19). In areas of low endemicity, such as the United States and Western Europe, subgenotype IA dominates, but all genotypes and subtypes have been reported (6, 16, 23). Most HAV strains in these countries can be identified as imported strains by phylogenetic analysis thanks to growing sequence databases, which allow for the tracing of the geographic origin of a given subgenotype (16). No information is found regarding cases in Plumas County, California, which is located on the eastern edge of California, northeast of the coastal Santa Cruz County. More information is needed bout cases in Plumas County - Mod.LL The state of California can be located on the HealthMap/ProMED-mail interactive map at . A county map can be seen at  . - Sr.Tech.Ed.MJ] ***** [2] Date: Tue 13 Jun 2017 Source: Orange County Health Care Agency [edited] In the last month, 3 cases of hepatitis A virus (HAV) infection have been diagnosed in Orange County residents. The cases are adult males aged 32-57, none with a history of travel or other apparent hepatitis A exposure. Illness onset dates ranged from 2-26 May 2017. A common source for these infections has not been identified; Orange County Public Health is investigating the situation. 15-25 cases of hepatitis A infection have been reported annually in Orange County from 2011-16, the vast majority following exposure either during international travel or to a known case of hepatitis A. Of note, San Diego County has had 160 cases of hepatitis A, including 4 deaths, reported since early 2017, primarily in homeless and/or illicit drug user populations. None of the recently-identified Orange County cases have a history of these risk factors or connection to San Diego's outbreak, but it is possible that our County may have cases of hepatitis A associated with this event. Additional information on the San Diego outbreak can be found at  . The FDA also recently announced a national recall of frozen tuna potentially contaminated with hepatitis A which was served in several restaurants in Southern California, including Orange County. No cases of hepatitis A have been identified thus far in association with this event in Orange County or elsewhere. The complete recall advisory can be found at  . -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail Rapporteur Mary Marshall [The Orange County cases do not appear to have the same epidemiologic co-factors that are reported from San Diego and Santa Cruz counties. The recent recall of HAV potentially contaminated tuna could be related to the Orange County cases but, to date, there is no direct evidence to support this. ProMED-mail would like more information in this regard and about clusters in other California counties and elsewhere. - Mod.LL] [", "CHOLERA, DIARRHEA AND DYSENTERY UPDATE (53): AFRICA *************************************************** A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases In this update: Africa [1] Cholera - Tanzania (Zanzibar) [2] Cholera - Somalia: WHO ****** [1] Cholera - Tanzania (Zanzibar) Date: Thu 15 Jun 2017 Source: Xinhua News Agency [edited] A cholera outbreak across Tanzania's semi-autonomous archipelago of Zanzibar has killed 1 person and infected 180 in 32 weeks, a senior official said [Tue 13 Jun 2017]. Fadhili Mohamed, Director of Disease Prevention from Zanzibar's Ministry of Health and Social Welfare said that there were 23 cases of cholera on [28 May 2017], but now the number went up more than 9 times with 1 death. He said that about 180 people have been admitted to the designated Chumbuni camp in Zanzibar's West-Unguja region following the outbreak of cholera. \"This is an increase of more than 150 patients since the disease outbreak was reported with 23 cholera patients only,\" the official said, confirming the death of a patient, who was a 10-year-old child. The situation has forced the ministry to open up another cholera patient camp in Gamba area in Zanzibar's North-Unguja region, according to Mohamed. Mohamed reminded food vendors to adhere to regulations which prohibit the selling of food at congested areas. \"We are aware of some few people who are violating the by-laws. Anyone caught selling food in prohibited areas will be punished in accordance with the laws,\" he said. He added that the bad thing is that most of the affected people are children aged below ten years, calling for patients to consider cleaning their homes and ensure that children wash hands before and after eating. -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail [Maps of Tanzania can be seen at and . - Sr.Tech.Ed.MJ] ****** [2] Cholera - Somalia: WHO Date: Sat 10 Jun 2017 Source: UN Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA), ReliefWeb, WHO report [edited] The Ministry of Health of Somalia has reported 2679 acute watery diarrhea (AWD)/cholera cases and 23 deaths for week 21 (22-29 May 2017). The cumulative figures for the cholera outbreak since the beginning of the year [2017] stands at 45 400 cases and 738 deaths. The case-fatality rate of 1.6 percent remains above the emergency threshold of 1 percent. While timely and effective interventions have limited the increase in cholera cases overall, new cases continue to be reported. Most of the cases were reported in Banadir region in Wadajir district, Luq in Gedo, Dusamareb, Galgadud, and Baidoa in Bay region and Buhodle Ayn region from Puntland. The health cluster, led by WHO, is working collaboratively with the Ministry of Health, partners, and health authorities to respond to the outbreak and implement preventative measures around the country. In Puntland, 59 mobile teams were deployed to IDP [internally displaced persons] settlements. In Somaliland, water purification teams were activated in Toghdeer and Sanag, integrated diarrhoeal disease kits (IDDK) were distribtued in affected regions as well as 500 Cary-Blair transport medium to collect and diagnose stool samples. The 2nd round of an oral cholera vaccination campaign was completed on [26 May 2017] for over 400 000 persons aged 1 year and older in Baidoa and Jowhar districts. Lack of rains for consecutive seasons and poor rainfall in Somalia has led to a severe drought that has killed livestock and crops, displaced hundreds of thousands of Somalis, and left around 6.2 out of 12.3 million people in need of humanitarian assistance. Nearly 5.5 million people are at risk of contracting water-borne diseases like cholera. While the Gu rainy season has brought in some relief, floods are now expected to increase the number of cholera cases. -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail [Maps of Somalia can be seen at  and  . - Sr.Tech.Ed.MJ [Aggressive interventions to stem outbreaks of cholera include providing sources of clean water and a vaccination campaign. The following is extracted from Lutwick LI, Preis J, Choi P: Cholera. In: Chronic illness and disability: the pediatric gastrointestinal tract. Greydanus DE, Atay O, Merrick J (eds). NY: Nova Bioscience, 2017 (in press): \"For a variety of logistic, financial, and historical reasons, vaccines have not been available for cholera control programs outside of Viet Nam. Given as 2 or 3 dose courses, efficacy can be as high as 60-80 per cent for at least 2-3 years but much shorter protection lengths in children younger than 5 years of age. Cost-effectiveness, especially once an outbreak has occurred, had remained unproven until reports from Guinea (57) and Haiti (58) demonstrated utility. \"The current vaccines prequalified for use by WHO (59) are: - Dukoral (produced in Sweden) that contains several biotypes of O1 with recombinant cholera toxin B subunit, which also offers some protection against enterotoxigenic _E. coli_; - Shanchol (produced in India) that contains biotypes of both O1 and O139 without the recombinant B unit. In a large study in Kolkata, India, a cluster-randomized, double blind, placebo-controlled study of this product (60), the cumulative efficacy of the vaccine at 5 years was 65 per cent (95 per cent CI 52-74, p less than 0.0001). A locally-produced vaccine similar to this vaccine (mORCVAX) is produced in Viet Nam; - Euvichol (produced in South Korea) that, like Shanchol, contains both O1 and O139 without recombinant B subunit. This vaccine has been reported to be non-inferior to Shanchol in a Philippine study (61). In June 2016, the US FDA for the 1st time approved a cholera vaccine for use locally in travelers to cholera-endemic areas. This vaccine, Vaxchora, is an oral live, attenuated biologic (62) that is a reformulation of a previous product. This product, a single dose immunization also referred to as CVD 102-HgR, must be stored in the frozen state and as a live, attenuated bacterial vaccine is not given until at least 14 days after antibacterials were used and should be given at least 10 days before oral chloroquine antimalarial prophylaxis. Single dose use is an advantage over the older inactivated products which are given in 2 doses. Studies, however, have suggested that one dose of these inactivated oral vaccines can be effective when the vaccines are in short supply in both endemic and outbreak situations (63, 64). References ---------- 57. Luquero FJ, Grout L, Ciglenecki I, et al. Use of _Vibrio cholerae_ vaccine in an outbreak in Guinea. N Engl J Med. 2014; 370(22): 2111-2120; . 58. S\u00e9v\u00e8re K, Rouzier V, Anglade SB, et al. Effectiveness of oral cholera vaccine in Haiti: 37-month follow-up. Am J Trop Med Hyg. 2016; 94(5): 1136-1142;  . 59. Bhattacharya SK, Sur D, Ali M, et al. 5 year efficacy of a bivalent killed whole-cell oral cholera vaccine in Kolkata, India: a cluster-randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial. Lancet Inf Dis. 2013; 13(12): 1050-1056;  . 60. WHO. WHO prequalified vaccines.  . 61. Balk YO, Choi SK, Olveda RM, et al. A randomized, non-inferiority trial comparing two bivalent killed, whole cell, oral cholera vaccines (Euvichol vs Shanchol) in the Philippines. Vaccine 2015; 33(46): 6350-65; . 62. Freedman DO. Re-born in the USA: another cholera vaccine for travellers. Travel Med Infect Dis. 2016; 14(4): 295-6; abstract available at  . 63. Qadri F, Wierzba TF, Ali M, et al. Efficacy of a single dose, inactivated oral cholera vaccine in Bangladesh. N Engl J Med. 2016; 374(18): 1723-32;  . 64. Azman AS, Parker LA, Rumunu J, et al. Effectiveness of one dose of oral cholera vaccine in response to an outbreak: a case-cohort study. Lancet Global Health 2016; 4(11): e856-e863;  .\" - Mod.LL] [", "UNDIAGNOSED DIE-OFF, AVIAN - USA: (MICHIGAN) GULL, REQUEST FOR INFORMATION ************************************************************************** A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Wed 14 Jun 2017, 1:41 PM Source: mlive.com [edited] With hundreds of screeching seagulls hovering above and rotting bird carcasses littering the streets, the scene near Zug Island and the waste water treatment plant in Southwest Detroit seems straight out of an apocalyptic horror movie. Young seagulls pitching camp near Jefferson Avenue are dying off en masse, and the Department of Natural Resources isn't quite sure why. Residents and commuters reported the deaths, some claiming to have seen at least 100 bloodied and rotting bird carcasses at a time littering the roadway throughout the last week [week 5 to 11 Jun 2017]. The birds are young. They have been picked at, and their bodies are everywhere. The area is a highly industrial part of the city, and many have jumped to conclusions about toxic waste poisoning the birds. Tom Cooley, a biologist with the DNR's wildlife disease lab team, is looking for a clear answer. Cooley and his team collected samples of the carcasses and are currently running multiple tests, including toxicology examinations for metals and pesticides, as well as botulism and histopathology exams looking for skin disease. Some of the tests may take weeks to produce conclusive answers, but Cooley believes, for now, that the birds are simply competing for limited resources. [Byline: Ben Solis] -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts [The causes underlying massive bird die-offs could be several, and there is need of post mortem examination and other steps of an outbreak investigation to be able to speculate about plausible reasons. Information about this episode and the tests being carried out would be greatly appreciated. - Mod.PMB A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  .] [", "CHOLERA, DIARRHEA AND DYSENTERY UPDATE (54): ASIA (YEMEN) ********************************************************* A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Thu 15 Jun 2017 Source: reliefweb, a WHO report [edited] The Ministry of Public Health and Population of Yemen has recorded a total of 29 562 suspected cholera cases and 172 associated deaths during the period 5 to 12 Jun 2017. Since the outbreak started in October 2016, a cumulative total of 140 116 suspected cases of cholera and 989 associated deaths have been reported across the country. The overall case-fatality rate is 0.7 percent; however, it is higher (3.2 percent) among people aged over 60. While cholera is endemic in Yemen, the country has experienced a surge in cholera cases since [27 Apr 2017]. Cholera has affected around 268 districts in 20 governorates across the country. Approximately half (49.5 percent / 69 306) of the suspected cholera cases have been reported from 4 governorates -Amanat Al Asimah, Al Hudaydah, Amran and Hajjah. WHO and health partners are actively supporting the Ministry through a cholera task force to improve cholera response efforts at the national and local levels. This includes the establishment of 18 diarrhea treatment facilities and 28 oral dehydration centres, training of health workers to manage cases, water purification in communities, deployment of rapid response team to manage cholera cases investigations and respond to the outbreak, enhancement of Yemen's disease early warning surveillance systems, and provision of emergency medical supplies to treatment facilities. -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail [The statistics of the impressive ongoing epidemic in Yemen in 2017 are: Date (2017) / Cases / Deaths 8 May / 1360 / 25 11 May / 2752 / 51 13 May / 8595 / 115 14 May / 11 000 / 180 17 May / 17 200 / 209 19 May / 23 500 / 242 21 May / 29 300 / 315 22 May / 35 217 / 361 24 May / 42 207 / 420 27 May / 51 832 / 471 30 May / 65 300 / 532 2 Jun / 73 700 / 605 4 Jun / 86 400 / 676 5 Jun / 91 400 / 728 6 Jun / 96 000 / 746 7 Jun / 101 820 / 789 10 Jun / 116 700 / 869 12 Jun / 124 002 / 923 14 Jun / 140 116 / 989 To be consistent with past posts, the date is the day prior to the specific posting but, as this one, may not reflect the data point day. In about 7 weeks, almost 140 000 cases and 1000 deaths have been reported with no clear sign of the numbers slowing down. - Mod.LL A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  .] [", "POLIOMYELITIS UPDATE (11): AFGHANISTAN, WILD POLIOVIRUS, GLOBAL UPDATE ********************************************************************** A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Thu 15 Jun 2017 Source: Polio Global Eradication Initiative [edited] Poliovirus Weekly Update As of: 14-Jun-2017, World Health Organization New wild poliovirus cases reported this week: 1 Total number of wild poliovirus cases in 2017: 6 Total number of wild poliovirus cases in 2016: 37 New cVDPV cases reported this week: 0 Total number of cVDPV cases in 2017: 6 Total number of cVDPV cases in 2016: 5 Headlines - Global health leaders are meeting this week at the Rotary International Convention in Atlanta, USA, and reaffirmed their commitment to eradicating polio by pledging US$1.2 billion to end the disease. - Summary of newly-reported viruses this week: Afghanistan - one new wild poliovirus type 1 (WPV1) was isolated from a healthy household contact of an acute flaccid paralysis (AFP) case. See country-specific sections below for more details. Afghanistan - One new wild poliovirus type 1(WPV1) case was reported in the past week with onset of paralysis, [16 Apr 2017] from Nawzad district, Hilmand. The virus was isolated from a healthy household contact of this case. This brings the total number of WPV1 cases for 2017 to 4 and is the most recent case in the country. - With most of Afghanistan polio-free, efforts are focused on continuing to strengthen operations, in close coordination with Pakistan, to address remaining low-level transmission in the common reservoir area of the Quetta-Kandahar corridor. - Afghanistan is carrying out a programme review focusing on the implementation of the National Emergency Action Plan and making necessary adjustments for the second half of 2017. - Polio eradication teams from East and South East Afghanistan and neighbouring FATA and Khyber Pakhtunkhwa in Pakistan met in Kabul on [24 - 25 May 2017] to review the current coordination mechanisms and agree on additional measures to further improve implementation in the WPV common reservoirs. Core teams from the National Emergency Operation Centres Afghanistan and Pakistan also met to discuss next steps on further improving the vaccination strategies for high risk mobile populations. Pakistan - No new wild poliovirus type 1 (WPV1) cases were reported in the past week. The total number of WPV1 cases for 2017 remains 2, and for 2016 remains 20. The most recent case had onset of paralysis on [13 Feb 2017], from Diamir district, Gilgit Baltistan. - The year 2016 saw the lowest ever annual number of polio cases in the country but poliovirus continues to be isolated through environmental surveillance over a significant geographical range. Efforts are ongoing through implementation of the national emergency action plan to address remaining gaps in coverage and surveillance, in close coordination with neighbouring Afghanistan. - The National Polio Management Team is meeting on [8 - 9 Jun 2017] to review implementation of the National Emergency Action Plan during the low transmission season, and to agree on essential adjustments to the plan for the second half of 2017. Nigeria - No new cases of wild poliovirus type 1 (WPV1) were reported in the past week. The total number of WPV1 cases for 2016 remains 4 and no cases have been reported in 2017. The most recent case had onset of paralysis on [21 Aug 2016] in Monguno Local Government Area (LGA), Borno. - Nigeria continues to implement emergency response to the detected WPV1 strain and circulating vaccine-derived poliovirus type 2 (cVDPV2) strains affecting the country. - The response is part of a broader regional outbreak response, coordinated with neighbouring countries, in particular the Lake Chad sub-region, including northern Cameroon, parts of Central African Republic, Chad and southern Niger. - Detection of the polio cases in Nigeria underscores the risk posed by low-level undetected transmission and the urgent need to strengthen subnational surveillance. Lake Chad Basin - The detection of wild poliovirus type 1 (WPV1) and circulating vaccine-derived poliovirus type 2 (cVDPV2) in Nigeria poses a risk to the neighbouring countries of the Lake Chad basin and hence an outbreak response plan is being implemented as part of the response to the Nigeria outbreak. - Emergency outbreak response efforts continue across the Lake Chad basin, together with activities to fill subnational surveillance gaps across the region. Central Africa - No new cases were reported in the past week. The Democratic Republic of the Congo (DR Congo) is affected by 2 separate outbreaks of circulating vaccine derived poliovirus type 2 (cVDPV2), in Haut Lomami province (2 cases, with onset of paralysis on [8 Mar 2017 and 20 Feb 2017]); and in Maniema province (2 cases with onset of paralysis on [26 Mar 2017 and 18 Apr 2017], with an additional isolate detected in a healthy individual with sample collection on [2 May 2017]). - Outbreak response plans are currently being finalised, with supplementary immunization activities using monovalent oral polio vaccine type 2 (mOPV2) in line with internationally-agreed outbreak response protocols. Surveillance and immunization activities are being strengthened in neighbouring countries. - DR Congo is also affected by an Ebola outbreak, in Bas Uele province in the north of the country. Coordination among both outbreak response teams will be necessary and teams are already working on this. Syrian Arab Republic - In Syria, no new cases of circulating vaccine-derived poliovirus type 2 (cVDPV2) were reported in the past week. Total number of cVDPV2 cases remains 2 for 2017, both from Mayadeen district of Dier-Ez-Zor governorate, with onset of paralysis of [5 Mar 2017 and 6 May 2017]. The virus strain was also confirmed from a healthy contacts, collected on [25 Apr 2017]. - No case of WPV1 has been reported in Syria since [21 Jan 2014]. - Outbreak response plans are being finalized, in line with internationally-agreed outbreak response protocols. Although access to Deir-Ez-Zor is compromised due to insecurity, the Governorate has been partially reached by several vaccination campaigns against polio and other vaccine-preventable diseases since the beginning of 2016. Most recently, 2 campaigns have been conducted in March and April 2017 using the bivalent oral polio vaccine (OPV). However, only limited coverage was possible through these campaigns. Officially reported wild poliovirus cases as of 13 Jun 2017 Total global cases in 2017: 6 (compared with 17 for the same period in 2016) Total in endemic countries in 2017: 6 (compared with 17 for the same period in 2016) Total in non-endemic countries in 2017: 0 (compared with 0 for the same period in 2016) - Afghanistan: 4 cases in 2017 (compared with 6 for the same period in 2016), onset of paralysis of most recent case: 16 Apr2017 - Pakistan: 2 cases in 2017 (compared with 11 for the same period in 2016), onset of paralysis of most recent case: 13 Feb 2017 - Nigeria: 0 case in 2017 (compared with 0 for the same period in 2016), onset of paralysis of most recent case: 21 Aug 2016 - Total global cases in 2016: 37 - Total in endemic countries: 37 - Total in non-endemic countries: 0 Officially reported cVDPV cases as of 13 Jun 2017 Total global cases in 2017: 6 (compared with 3 for the same period in 2016) - Syrian Arab Republic: 2 cases in 2017 (compared with 0 for the same period in 2016), onset of paralysis of most recent case: 6 May 2017 - Democratic Republic of the Congo: 4 cases in 2017 (compared with 0 for the same period in 2016), onset of paralysis of most recent case: 18 Apr 2017 - Pakistan: 0 case in 2017 (compared with 0 for the same period in 2016), onset of paralysis of most recent case: 17 Dec 2016 - Nigeria: 0 case in 2017 (compared with 0 for the same period in 2016), onset of paralysis of most recent case: 28 Oct 2016 - Lao People's Democratic Republic: 0 case in 2017 (compared with 3 for the same period in 2016), onset of paralysis of most recent case: 11 Jan 2016 - Total global cases in 2016: 5 - Total in endemic countries: 2 - Total in non-endemic countries: 3 -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail [The good news is that we are almost halfway through this calendar year (2017) and there have only been 6 confirmed cases of polio due to infection with the WPV1 - with all 6 cases reported from 2 endemic countries - Afghanistan (4 cases) and Pakistan (2 cases). The bad news is that there continue to be environmental samples in Pakistan with WPV1 isolates - most likely due to asymptomatic infections, but a sign that the virus continues to circulate in the country. The good news from Nigeria, (the 3rd remaining endemic country) is that there have been no further WPV1 associated polio cases identified since late August 2016. A cVDPV2 was identified in Nigeria in October 2016. I have been unable to find information on possible environmental sampling ongoing in Nigeria to see if there is evidence of continued circulation of both the WPV1 and the cVDPV2. A map showing the locations of confirmed WPV and cVDPV cases can be found at: . The HealthMap/ProMED map of Afghanistan can be found at:  . - Mod.MPP] [", "WEST NILE VIRUS - AMERICAS (02): USA (KENTUCKY) EQUINE ****************************************************** A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Wed 14 Jun 2017 Source: The Horse [edited] The Kentucky State Veterinarian's office has announced that a horse from Bourbon County has tested positive for West Nile virus (WNV). This is the 1st equine WNV case confirmed in the commonwealth this year. In a statement Kentucky Equine Programs manager E.S. \"Rusty\" Ford said the case was confirmed on [13 Jun 2017]. The yearling Thoroughbred filly 1st showed signs of disease on [7 Jun 2017]. She was initially down, but able to rise with assistance; she also suffered muscle fasciculation (twitching) and seizures. By [7 Jun 2017] her condition had improved, and on [13 Jun 2017] the attending veterinarian reported the filly continued to show daily improvement. Ford's statement indicated that the filly had been vaccinated against WNV in 2016 and had received a booster on [1 Jun 2017]. West Nile is transmitted to horses via bites from infected mosquitoes. Clinical signs for WNV include flulike signs, where the horse seems mildly anorexic and depressed; fine and coarse muscle and skin fasciculation; hyperesthesia (hypersensitivity to touch and sound); changes in mentation (mentality), when horses look like they are daydreaming or \"just not with it\"; occasional somnolence (drowsiness); propulsive walking (driving or pushing forward, often without control); and \"spinal\" signs, including asymmetrical weakness. Some horses show asymmetrical or symmetrical ataxia. Equine mortality rate can be as high as 30-40 percent. Horse owners should also consult their private practicing veterinarian to determine an appropriate disease prevention plan for their horses. Vaccines have proven to be a very effective prevention tool. Horses that have been vaccinated in past years will need an annual booster shot. However, if an owner did not vaccinate their animal in previous years, the horse will need the 2-shot vaccination series within a 3- to 6-week period. In addition to vaccinations, horse owners also need to reduce the mosquito populations and their possible breeding areas. Recommendations include removing stagnant water sources, keeping animals inside during the bugs' feeding times, which are typically early in the morning and evening, and using mosquito repellents. [Byline: Erica Larson] -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts [The dates given are a bit confusing. I suspect that this filly was first noted to be ill on [5 or 6 Jun 2017] but was showing signs of recovery by the [7 Jun 2017]. A strong anamnesic response should have kicked in by then. For the rest of you in the US & Canada it is late but not too late to get your horses vaccinated. - Mod.MHJ A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  .] [", "CHRONIC WASTING DISEASE, CERVID - USA (06): (KANSAS) **************************************************** A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Tue 13 Jun 2017 10:24 PM Source: KWCH12 [edited] According to a wildlife research biologist, the deer population could be in jeopardy years from now because of a spreading disease. Biologist Matt Peek said Chronic Wasting Disease isn't new, but it's mostly affected deer in the northwest part of Kansas. \"It has gradually spread south and east from there,\" said Peek. Game wardens said they found a deer in Northwest Kansas that had lost all fear of humans and was too weak to stand. They said signs point to it having CWD [Chronic wasting disease]. That deer was removed, and game wardens took lymph nodes for further testing. \"It is slowly spreading and slowly increasing in prevalence where it does exist,\" said Peek. He said the deer population could be in danger long term. \"I'm talking about decades for deer to decrease in population and eventually even become eliminated or extinct in certain areas,\" said Peek. Hunter Ryan Pennock worries he could accidentally shoot an infected deer. \"That's what a hunter doesn't want to do,\" said Pennock. \"They don't want to waste a tag on something if they shoot something like that.\" [But] Peek said in other states where the problem is more prevalent, fewer tags are given out. -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail [We 1st reported CWD in Kansas in 2006 (24 Jan 2006 Chronic wasting disease, cervids - USA (KS) http://promedmail.org/post/20060124.0237) and latterly in March, 2013 (14 Mar 2013 Chronic wasting disease, cervid - USA (04): (KS) http://promedmail.org/post/20130314.1586084). So the disease has been in the state adequately to get established, unfortunately. - Mod.MHJ A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  .] [", "PLAGUE - USA (07): (COLORADO) FELINE ************************************ A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Wed 14 Jun 2017 1:59 p.m. MT Source: Coloradoan [edited] A domestic cat in rural northwest Weld County has tested positive for plague. The cat became sick in early June [2017] and is receiving treatment, according to a Wednesday news release from the Weld County Department of Public Health and Environment. The cat is expected to make a full recovery, and the owner is taking preventive antibiotics. Weld County has taken the lead on the case, but the home is near the Larimer-Weld county line. The Larimer County Department of Health and Environment has one key message for residents: Don't panic. Larimer and Weld counties have instances of plague in rodents nearly every year, especially in more rural areas. Prairie dogs test positive for plague fairly regularly, and family pets occasionally contract the disease. Larimer County health department spokeswoman Katie O'Donnell said 3 cats and a dog have been infected in Larimer County in the past 2 years. Plague is treatable, both in people and animals, as long as it's caught early, O'Donnell said. The most common strain in the area is bubonic plague, which is not contagious person to person but is carried by infected fleas and rodents. People most commonly contract plague from the bite of an infected flea, but they can also get the disease from direct contact with an infected animal. O'Donnell said the department sees the bulk of its cases between spring and the 1st freeze in the fall. Symptoms include a sudden onset of fever, headache, chills, weakness, nausea, vomiting and diarrhea, as well as swollen and painful lymph nodes near the flea bite. People can help prevent infection by applying insect repellent on themselves and flea-prevention treatments on their animals, O'Donnell said. In 2015, TG, a 16-year-old Poudre High School student, died after he contracted septicemic plague, a rare and highly fatal strain. He was Larimer County's 1st confirmed plague death since 1999. Plague is largely concentrated in the western United States, and an average of 7 people contract the disease nationwide each year, according to the Centers for Disease Control. Prevent plague and other animal-borne diseases [Source: Weld County Department of Public Health and Environment]  - Avoid flea bites: Stay away from rodents, and consider wearing repellent when in areas where rodents are present.  - Keep fleas off your pets by applying flea-control products.  - Do not allow cats or dogs that roam and hunt to sleep in your bed, as they can carry fleas.  - Reduce rodent habitat around your home. Remove brush, trim vegetation and keep the area clear.  - Do not feed or handle wildlife. If you must dispose of a carcass, wear gloves or use a shovel. [Byline: Cassa Niedringhaus] -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail [Domestic cats present a risk because they can bring infected fleas into the house. Also you don't want an infected pet cat nuzzling and breathing into your mouth. But _Yersnia pestis_ responds well to antibiotics if taken early, and preferably prophylacticly if exposure is suspected. If you can it is worth watching and listening to the video clip in this report. - Mod.MHJ A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  .] [", "BOTULISM - MOROCCO: (DRAA-TAFILALET) FATAL ****************************************** A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Wed 14 Jun 2017 13:14 Source: L'aconomiste [in French, machine transl, edited] Consumers, pay attention to what you put on your plates! Three cases of foodborne illnesses have recently been recorded in a family in Ouarzazate [Province of Ouarzazate, Draa-Tafilalet region], which led to the death of the mother and her daughter. According to the National Office of Food Safety (ONSSA), these cases are due to the bacterium _Clostridium botulinum_\" which was found in the samples analyzed by the Office's services. The Office is expected to disclose the identity of the product in question for the safety of consumers. It should be noted that the products usually incriminated in these poisoning cases are \"traditional and family food preserves\". In any case, the exact name given by ONSSA indicates that \"the production unit at the origin of the product in question works with great professionalism\" and that its products \"are healthy and meet all standards in force\". -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail [The ProMED MENA moderation mentions that the food vehicle for what is reported to be botulism was sausage but it is not entirely clear if the product was commercially or home produced (PRO/MENA> Foodborne illness - Morocco (09): (Draa-Tafilalet), fatal, botulism, RFI). Botulism, or sausage poisoning as it was originally termed, was 1st seriously studied following an outbreak in Wildbad, Germany in 1793. The outbreak involved 13 people, 6 of whom died, and was associated with consumption of a locally produced blood sausage. Following this outbreak, the number of reported cases of sausage poisoning rapidly increased, prompting a study of the disease by local health officer Justinius Kerner (1829). He described 230 cases, most of which were attributed to the consumption of sausage. The illness became known as \"botulism\" after \"botulus\", the Latin word for sausage. Dr\u00e2a-Tafilalet is one of the 12 regions of Morocco and is located in the Atlas Mountains in northwest Morocco and can be seen on a map at  - Mod.LL A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  .] [", "MERS-COV (39): SAUDI ARABIA (RIYADH), NOSOCOMIAL TRANSMISSION ************************************************************* A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Thu 15 Jun 2017 Source: Saudi MOH 14-15 Jun 2017 [edited] As of 14:00 [2:00 PM] today [Thu 15 Jun 2017], there have been a total of: 1663 laboratory-confirmed cases of MERS-CoV infection, including 670 deaths [reported case fatality rate 40.3 percent], 944 recoveries, and 49 currently active cases/infections. [As previously mentioned, the numbers of deaths, recoveries and currently active cases come from my spreadsheet tallies and differ from those listed on the Saudi MOH website; my spreadsheet counts asymptomatic infections. - Mod.MPP] Since the last ProMED-mail update [Tue 13 Jun 2017], there have been a total of: 6 newly confirmed cases/infections 0 newly reported fatalities, and 1 newly reported recovery. Information on newly confirmed cases (6 cases)  - all from Riyadh  - all symptomatic infections  - no healthcare workers  - 4 documented nosocomial transmission Date: Thu 15 Jun 2017 (3 cases)  - all from Riyadh  - all secondary healthcare acquired cases in patients 1 - A 29-year-old Saudi male, non-healthcare worker, currently in critical condition. 2 - A 79-year-old Saudi male, non-healthcare worker, currently in stable condition. 3 - A 67-year-old expat male, non-healthcare worker, currently in critical condition. Date: Wed 14 Jun 2017 (3 cases) 4 - A 70-year-old Saudi female, non-healthcare worker, currently in critical condition. Classified as a secondary healthcare acquired case in a patient. 5 - A 59-year-old expat male, non-healthcare worker, currently in critical condition. Classified as under investigation. 6 - A-40-year-old Saudi male, non-healthcare worker, currently in stable condition. Classified as primary case with high risk exposures still under investigation. Information on newly confirmed recovery (1 recovery) Date: Thu 15 Jun 2017  - A 60-year-old Saudi male, non-healthcare worker with a history of pre-existing co-morbidities. [Reported as a newly confirmed case on 29 May 2017 at which time he was noted to be in stable condition. Classified as a primary case but high risk exposures were still under investigation at the time of initial confirmation report. - Mod.MPP] -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail [Well, so much for my optimism that transmission has slowed down. In the past 2 days, there have been 6 newly confirmed cases of MERS-CoV infection confirmed in Riyadh Saudi Arabia, bringing the total number of cases reported by Saudi Arabia to 1663, including 670 deaths (reported case fatality rate 40.3 percent). Of note is that 4 of the 6 newly confirmed cases are confirmed to be part of the ongoing nosocomial outbreaks, with all 4 cases occurring in patients. Of the 2 remaining cases, one has not been classified other than mentioned as still under investigation, with the other classified as a primary case but high risk exposures are still under investigation. One can't help but wonder if there is some connection to the involved healthcare facilities. Since the beginning of May 2017, there have been a total of 53 laboratory confirmed cases/infections of MERS-CoV infection confirmed in Riyadh Saudi Arabia, with 46 of these cases/infections confirmed since 1 Jun 2017. Forty three of the 53 confirmed cases/infections have been identified as healthcare facility acquired, with 28 of these cases occurring in healthcare workers. We await further details on the generations of transmission in each of the ongoing nosocomial outbreaks. The HealthMap/ProMED map of Saudi Arabia can be found at:  . - Mod.MPP A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  .] [", "UNDIAGNOSED DEATHS - HUMAN, JAPAN (KAWASAKI CITY, KANAGAWA) REQUEST FOR INFORMATION *********************************************************************************** A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Thu 15 Jun 2017 19:19 Source: NHK News Wed [in Japanese, machine trans., edited] A total of 2 4-year-old children attending the same kindergarten died on [Tue 6 and Mon 12 Jun 2017] in Kawasaki City [Kanagawa prefecture]. Kawasaki City official said. They were transferred to the hospital but died shortly after arrival. The cause of their death is still under investigation. Case 1: a 4-year-old girl. She developed fever, vomiting and chest pain on [Sun 4 Jun 2017] which was diagnosed as acute gastroenteritis. Her vomiting worsened on early morning on [Tue 6 June 2017] and died shortly after hospital transfer. Case 2: a 4-year-old boy. He was absent from kindergarten due to cold-like symptoms with fever and he developed seizure around 11 am and died shortly after hospital transfer. There are no other pupils or family members who developed similar symptoms. Kawasaki City public health authority suspects an infectious disease etiology and the National Institute of Infectious Diseases is investigating the incident. -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail [Kanagawa is a coastal prefecture just south of Tokyo. Enterovirus (possibly EV71 or CVA16) may be the etiologic agent. This virus causes myocarditis and encephalitis. There was a similar outbreak in Osaka, Japan in 1997 and many in Southeast Asia.  (written in Japanese) It is early for HFMD [hand, foot, and mouth disease] season, but this year's epidemic curve is following a trend of epidemic years. (The bottom graph of page 9) Kanagawa Prefecture reports 89 HFMD cases in Week 21 (0.41 per sentinel) and it is below the national average (0.97 per sentinel). Any further information on these cases would be welcome by ProMED. A Healthmap/ProMED map of Japan can be seen at  . - Mod.LK A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  .] .................................................lk/ec/dk *##########################################################* ************************************************************ ProMED-mail makes every effort to verify the reports that are posted, but the accuracy and completeness of the information, and of any statements or opinions based thereon, are not guaranteed. The reader assumes all risks in using information posted or archived by ProMED-mail. ISID and its associated service providers shall not be held responsible for errors or omissions or held liable for any damages incurred as a result of use or reliance upon posted or archived material. ************************************************************ Donate to ProMED-mail. Details available at: ************************************************************ Visit ProMED-mail's web site at . Send all items for posting to: promed@promedmail.org (NOT to an individual moderator). If you do not give your full name name and affiliation, it may not be posted. You may unsub- scribe at . For assistance from a human being, send mail to:  . ############################################################ ############################################################ List-Unsubscribe: http://ww4.isid.org/promedmail/subscribe.php", "UNDIAGNOSED ACUTE RESPIRATORY ILLNESS - COLOMBIA: REQUEST FOR INFORMATION *************************************************************************** A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Mon 12 Jun 2017 Source: Caracol Radio [machine trans., edited] Colombian Health Minister insists that all preventive methods are being taken after 195 children under 5 die of an acute respiratory infection This is revealed in a report by the National Institute of Health. Authorities recommend preventing diseases with vaccination. The Ministry of Health has insisted that preventive measures be taken to prevent acute respiratory infection (ARI) for public health in the country. To date, the National Health Institute has reported 195 deaths per acute respiratory infection in children under 5 years of age. The places where they have presented are Cundinamarca, Valle del Cauca and Bogota, Putumayo, Nari\u00f1o, Norte de Santander, La Guajira, C\u00f3rdoba, Magdalena, Guain\u00eda, Bol\u00edvar and Cauca. According to the report up to [Sat 3 Jun 2017], national mortality is 4.5 per 100 000 children under 5 years of age. However, in Guain\u00eda, Choc\u00f3 and Vaup\u00e9s have the highest mortality in children under 5 with 75.5, 23.0 and 16.6 respectively [per 100 000]. That's not all. To date, more than 3.1 million outpatient and emergency room records have been reported for this disease. As the Minsalud studies have shown, the influenza vaccine is recommended to be given the 1st semester of each year. As the individual is thus covered during the 2 epidemiological peaks usually evidenced in the country are 1st from April to July, and the 2nd from September to November. -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts [ProMED welcomes any information readers may have on the etiology of this acute respiratory disease. The report suggests influenza since the health ministry is recommending influenza vaccination, but a number of viruses cause acute respiratory disease. A publication from 2007 found influenza A (H3N2) was the most frequently isolated agent from an outbreak in 2003 in Colombia: Herrera D1, de la Hoz F, Velandia M. Severe respiratory disease and its relationship with respiratory viruses in Colombia. Int J Infect Dis. 2008 Mar;12(2):139-42. Epub 2007 Aug 27. Background: There are important gaps in our understanding of the epidemiology of respiratory virus infections in tropical countries. In September 2003, the Colombian epidemiological surveillance system was notified of several deaths from an acute respiratory disease (ARD). Methods: In order to identify the agents associated with ARD cases, a clinical and laboratory-based surveillance system was implemented throughout the country. Results: Between September 19 and December 31, 2003, 64 suspected cases of ARD were reported; of these reported cases, 21 (33 percent) died. Among 25 patients who underwent virus studies, influenza A (H3N2) (n=7) was the most frequently identified agent. Other viruses included parainfluenza (4), influenza B (1), and respiratory syncytial virus (3). The peak occurrence of cases and deaths coincided with the replacement of the influenza A (H3N2) Panama strain, which had been circulating in Colombia since 1999, by 3 new influenza A (H3N2) strains (Korea, Fujian, and Wyoming). Laboratory assays are needed to determine the agent in this current outbreak, and likely are underway. A Healthmap/ProMED map of Colombia can be found at  . - Mod.LK A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  .] .................................................sb/lk/ec/dk *##########################################################* ************************************************************ ProMED-mail makes every effort to verify the reports that are posted, but the accuracy and completeness of the information, and of any statements or opinions based thereon, are not guaranteed. The reader assumes all risks in using information posted or archived by ProMED-mail. ISID and its associated service providers shall not be held responsible for errors or omissions or held liable for any damages incurred as a result of use or reliance upon posted or archived material. ************************************************************ Donate to ProMED-mail. Details available at: ************************************************************ Visit ProMED-mail's web site at . Send all items for posting to: promed@promedmail.org (NOT to an individual moderator). If you do not give your full name name and affiliation, it may not be posted. You may unsub- scribe at . For assistance from a human being, send mail to:  . ############################################################ ############################################################ List-Unsubscribe: http://ww4.isid.org/promedmail/subscribe.php", "RABIES (26): ASIA (INDIA, NEPAL, PAKISTAN) AFRICA (ALGERIA) ANIMAL, HUMAN ************************************************************************* A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases In this posting: [1] Algeria (Relizane): bovine [2] India: nationwide human cases compiled, 2014-2016 [3] Pakistan (FATA): human exposure, canine suspected [4] India (Pune): human suspected, 11 year incubation ****** [1] Algeria (Relizane): bovine Date: Tue 13 Jun 2017 19:55 CEST Source: R\u00e9flexion [in French, trans. Mod.AB, edited] A cow reported to be rabid in the Zedairia area of Relizane province caused panic among residents of Zedairia hamlet. Indeed, the information was conveyed via 'vox populi', indicating the presence of a rabid cow belonging to a breeder resident in the vicinity of a dense forest. According to preliminary information, the animal was bitten by another animal that would have carried the virus, presumably a dog or a wild animal wandering around the area. Immediately alerted, the municipal health services, supported by a veterinarian, quickly began an investigation to locate the origin of the contamination of the affected cow. In addition, a medical investigation was launched in the suspect areas, the inhabitable areas of the municipality and throughout its immediate surroundings. -- Communicated by: ProMED-MENA promed-mena@promedmail.org [This case of bovine rabies appeared in a cow raised near a dense forest, that would have been bitten by a domestic or wild carnivore that remains to be determined through the undertaken investigation. Other cases of animal rabies could be discovered during this investigation. - Mod.AB Maps of Algeria can be seen at and . - Sr.Tech.Ed.MJ] ****** [2] India: nationwide human cases compiled, 2014-2016 Date: Wed 14 Jun 2017 05.07 PM IST Source: Times of India [edited] Rabies claimed 16 lives in Gujarat between 2014 and 2016 as the state ranked 5th among 29 states and 7 union territories including national capital territory of Delhi. As per the figures given by the Union Health Ministry, India has reported 324 fatalities due to animal bite. Gujarat reported 7 deaths in 2014 and 8 in 2015, respectively. The figures came down in 2016 when the state reported only 1 death due to rabies. With 146 deaths, West Bengal reported highest number of deaths due to rabies followed by Delhi (39), Jharkhand (34) and Madhya Pradesh (23). Meanwhile Kerala reported 14 deaths followed by Odisha (12), Uttarakhand (6), Assam (5) and Bihar (5). Sources in the Gujarat health department said that the deaths must have occurred due to dog bites in various parts of the state. Ahmedabad city has also been facing the everlasting problems of stray dog menace as it reports an average of 600 cases of dog bites in every week. In wake of the rise in dog bites, Ahmedabad Municipal Corporation (AMC) officials decided to set a target of 1000 dog sterilizations a month for each of the 4 agencies working for the civic body. [Byline: Ashish Chauhan] -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail [According to the report above, \"As per the figures given by the Union Health Ministry, India has reported 324 fatalities due to animal bite\". Is this figure related to the year 2014, as may be assumed by the structure of the text? otherwise? India's human rabies statistics have been subject to discussions in the past, and are certainly in need of elucidation. The official annual number of human fatalities has been counted in 3-figure numbers, while 5-figure numbers are generally cited by international organisations. Subscribers are referred to the 2015 thread of discussions on the matter in several ProMED-mail's postings in a 2015 thread (see postings listed below), Mod.MHJ's comment, at the time, is applicable: \"Patently, we have a definition difference for a case of human rabies in a situation where public health records are not as rigorous as one might hope for, though the pathology is sound. But I think we can agree that if canine rabies were properly controlled in India, as it has been in many countries, it would cease to be a public health problem or even a veterinary problem. This is long, long overdue.\" For further reading and several references related to India's rabies statistics, subscribers are specifically referred to http://promedmail.org/post/20151028.3748032 and to the review paper in Ref 1. Reference ---------- Taylor LH, Nel LH. Global epidemiology of canine rabies: past, present, and future prospects Vet Med Res Rep 2015 6:373-83;  . Maps of India can be seen at  and  . - Sr.Tech.Ed.MJ] ****** [3] Pakistan (FATA): human exposure, canine suspected Date: Mon 5 Jun 2017 Source: MENAFN (Middle East North Africa Financial Network), Tribal News Network (TNN) [edited] A rabid dog bit 8 persons including 5 children, 2 women, and a man in Sadda area, near Karkhano Camp of Lower Kurram Agency [Federally Administered Territories, FATA] on Sunday night [4 Jun 2017]. A man whose 2 children were also bitten by the rabid dog told [that] anti-rabies vaccines were not available at the District Headquarters Hospital in Sadda, when he took his children for vaccination. He said he bought anti-rabies vaccine from private clinic for his children. -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail [Maps of Pakistan can be seen at and . - Sr.Tech.Ed.MJ ****** [4] India (Pune): human suspected, 11 year incubation Date: Thu 15 Jun 2017 07.57 AM IST Source: The Times of India, Times News Network (TNN) [edited] A scratch from a pet dog 11 years ago [is suspected to have] led to the death of a 45-year-old Army jawan [soldier] in Pune's Command Hospital on [31 Mar 2017]. Authorities of the Command Hospital that comes under Southern Command of Indian Army said the jawan was posted at the line of control in Jammu & Kashmir's Naushera sector in 2006 when an unvaccinated pet dog scratched the skin of his lower leg. On [25 Mar 2017], he developed full-blown rabies infection and died 5 days later. \"Apart from the scratch he suffered in 2006, the man had not come in contact with any animal bite. Besides, he did not have any associated illness and physiological condition,\" a state health official said. The jawan, originally from Maharashtra's Aurangabad district, developed rabies symptoms on [17 Mar 2017]. Initially, he took Ayurvedic treatment from doctor in his village. As his condition worsened, he was admitted to the Military Hospital in Aurangabad on [23 Mar 2017]. He was referred to Command Hospital in Pune on [24 Mar 2017] where he was admitted in the isolation ward with a history of abnormal behaviour, fever, and possible hydrophobia (fear of water). The death has revived the debate on rabies' average incubation period, which is generally believed to be is 30-60 days in humans. Experts said that although it is rare to have a long incubation period, medical literature suggests that although there have been cases where the infection has developed even after 14 to 19 years. They suggested that people should not ignore casual licks, scratches, or bites from an unvaccinated pet. Besides, they should immunise their pet against rabies every year. [Byline: Umesh Isalkar] -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail The report does not mention laboratory confirmation of the fatal rabies case described. In case laboratory confirmed, the patient's anamnesis deserves to be thoroughly studied, relatives/acquaintances preferably involved, to exclude possible exposure to rabies during the past year. An 11-year incubation period for rabies is highly exceptional, to say the least. - Mod.AS The following commentary by Mod.DK, published in response to a human case in Nepal said to had undergone a 53 year incubation period (see http://promedmail.org/post/20151115.3791390), is applicable here: \"Such incubation period is so long that a healthy bit of skepticism seems appropriate. At a minimum, we need 2 additional pieces of evidence: 1) viral isolation as a proof of diagnosis; and 2) genetic evaluation of the virus to determine its origin, such as dog or bat, etc. Even if it is of dog origin, a minor exposure over such a long duration could have been forgotten such as petting a dog with saliva on its fur.\" - Mod.AS [", "SCABIES - FRANCE: (PARIS) MIGRANTS ********************************** A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Sun 11 Jun 2017 8:05 CEST Source: FranceTVinfo [in French, trans. Sr.Tech.Ed.MJ, edited] The living conditions of homeless migrants in the vicinity of the Chapelle camp in the 18th arrondissement of Paris make it impossible to eradicate scabies, which persists despite the efforts of the health services and associations. It was believed that scabies belonged to another age, but it is present in the streets of Paris. Migrants in precarious conditions suffer from this very contagious disease of promiscuity. But without housing solutions that would allow medical follow-up under proper hygiene conditions, it is impossible to eradicate the problem. Faced with this situation, M\u00e9decins Sans Fronti\u00e8res [MSF] has sounded the alarm. Even if there are no official statistics on this disease, the High Council for Public Health has already estimated from data of the sale of drugs a 10 percent increase in cases detected between 2002 and 2010. In the \"jungle\" of Calais, the French Institute for Public Health Surveillance also estimated that scabies accounted for 20 percent of the diagnoses between the end of 2015 and mid-2016. With the dismantling of the \"jungle\" and the influx of new waves of migrants, this problem moved to Paris, where it is worrisome. Significant health monitoring needs ----------------------------------- \"We will not succeed in taking everyone. It's not possible, we can not.\" In front of the camp of migrants Porte de la Chapelle, on Thu 8 Jun 2017, Corinne Torre, head of the France mission of M\u00e9decins sans Fronti\u00e8res, said that the mobile clinic of MSF posted there [on 11 Jun 2017] will only make 25 to 30 consultations. Since the dismantling of the \"jungle\" of Calais, MSF, which closed its operations in France, has re-launched a mobile clinic project to meet the health needs in Paris. At Porte de la Chapelle, in the vicinity of the reception center for migrants, many people sleep outside in deplorable conditions of hygiene. Some have just arrived, others say they have been there for a month, without a shower or any spare clothing. A Somali migrant has been there for 20 days and is suffering from itching, especially in the neck, thighs, and lower abdomen. \"He scratches all night,\" describes his companion, who shares with him the piece of cardboard on which they sleep every night. A little further on, another 18-year-old Somali, scratches as soon as he rolls up his sleeves; his arms are covered with cutaneous lesions. More and more cases of scabies ------------------------------ However, a medical diagnosis is necessary to prove a case of scabies . \"Anyone who scratches does not have scabies,\" says Dr Abdon Goudjo, director of the Samu [emergency medical services] social health teams in Paris. \"It is necessary to distinguish between scabies and infected dermatoses because of a very irritated skin, either by the cold in winter or by hypersudation in summer [...] The majority of the people with skin irritations we see, actually have infected dermatoses.\" But scabies remains a persistent problem, especially since, unlike dermatoses, it is very contagious. Its transmission is by frequent and repeated physical contact, either \"skin against skin\", or by the linen and bedding. The health center, located inside the 1st reception center of the Porte de la Chapelle, has detected 157 cases of scabies since its opening in November 2016, according to Bruno Morel, CEO of Emmaus Solidarity. Among the migrants who sleep outside, the MSF mobile clinic detected 164 of the approximately 1300 consultations carried out since the end of December [2016]. If, on average, more than 1/10 of the consultations lead to a diagnosis of scabies, health professionals say they count more and more. \"Today, this corresponds to 1/3 of the consultations,\" says the general practitioner Mondane Berthault, who carries out all consultations at the mobile clinic. Despite its very bad reputation, \"scabies today heals well,\" says Dr Goudjo. \"It's like lice, everyone has caught lice, it's not a drama.\" Moreover, in order to ensure that foreign patients can be properly cared for, a telephone interpreting service is provided during the consultations, explains Barbara Bertini, Coordinator of permanence of access to health care (Pass -- hospital-based units providing primary care services to patients who lack health care coverage) activities of Ile-de-France. An impossible treatment without hosting solutions -------------------------------------------------- In the reception center the health center has a medical shower and, in case of scabies, \"they are given clean clothes, if they have already been housed, they change their sheets and are given medical treatment,\" says Bruno Morel, Emmaus Solidarity. These devices are effective, provided that people are accommodated. For migrants on the streets, that's another story. \"To cure a itch on the street is illusory,\" says Dr Goudjo. First, because the treatment of scabies requires 2 cures, to make sure that the disease does not reappear. \"It's a very mobile population, very complicated for medical follow-up,\" explains Dr Berthault. \"The only thing that can be done is to give them the double dose of drugs and explain to them to resume the treatment after 8 days.\" Effective treatment of scabies also assumes that patients completely change clothes. But often they only possess the clothes they are wearing. \"Ideally they could wash their clothes, boil their sheets ... but under these conditions, it's utopian,\" says Dr Berthault. A bad, or badly treated scabies can cause serious complications due to scratching. Especially when, as Dr Berthault points out, \"they have not been able to wash for days and they can not cut their nails, which become long and dirty.\" Once such infections are installed, it is essential to use antibiotics, without which one is exposed to a superinfection, staphylococcal in particular. Volunteers from Utopia 56 or the vestry of the church of Saint-Bernard de la Chapelle try to remedy the problem by providing new clothes to the needy. But even if a patient manages to get rid of the itch, if he returns to a wild camp where the parasite is circulating, he/she will be exposed again. Without the prospect of a reduction in the number of homeless migrants, the scabies problem will last. On 9 May 2017, 1609 people were evacuated from the 18th arrondissement, but wild encampments again swelled with migrants. \"For the last month, it has gone from worse to worse,\" says Corinne Torre; \"today there are 500 people sleeping around the door of the church. [...] With the summer, it will be multiplied I am quite worried about the situation,\" she adds, looking at the camp from the opposite pavement. [Byline: Louise Hemmerl\u00e9] -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail [As pointed out in the post, scabies in itself is not dangerous. The rise in scabies, however, point to the general unhygienic conditions of these refugees and pose a risk of outbreaks of lice borne infections like _Borrelia recurrentis_ (relapsing fever), _Bartonella quintana_ (trench fever) and _Rickettsia prowazekii_ (lice borne or epidemic typhus). There are already 3 reports in 2017 of relapsing fever in immigrants from Africa to Europe: - Cutuli SL et al. Lice, rodents, and many hopes: a rare disease in a young refugee. Crit Care. 2017; 21(1): 81. doi: 10.1186/s13054-017-1666-5;  . - Grecchi C et al. Louse-borne relapsing fever in a refugee from Mali. Infection. 2017; 45(3): 373-6. doi: 10.1007/s15010-017-0987-2; abstract available at . - Hyt\u00f6nen J et al. Louse-borne relapsing fever in Finland in two asylum seekers from Somalia. APMIS. 2017; 125(1): 59-62;  . Lice infestation is common in Africa, with reports of both trench fever and epidemic typhus: - Drali R et al. A new clade of African body and head lice infected by _Bartonella quintana_ and _Yersinia pestis_ - Democratic Republic of the Congo. Am J Trop Med Hyg. 2015; 93(5): 990-3. doi: 10.4269/ajtmh.14-0686;  . - Umulisa I et al. A mixed outbreak of epidemic typhus fever and trench fever in a youth rehabilitation center: risk factors for illness from a case-control study, Rwanda, 2012. Am J Trop Med Hyg. 2016; 95(2): 452-6. doi: 10.4269/ajtmh.15-0643);  . And a review from 2006 (Parola P. Rickettsioses in sub-Saharan Africa. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 2006; 1078: 42-7;  ) estimates that louse borne epidemic typhus is endemic in tropical and North Africa. Relapsing fever, trench fever, and epidemic typhus were last seen in a major scale during WWII, but scabies is a signal that the next wave of infestations will be lice and with _Borrelia recurrentis_, _Bartonella quintana_, and _Rickettsia prowazekii_ endemic in the countries of origin of many of the migrants, emphasizing the need to provide hygienic conditions during their stay in Europe. - Mod.EP A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  .] [", "FOODBORNE ILLNESS - JAPAN (05): (IBARAKI) SCHOOL STUDENTS, MILK *************************************************************** A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Tues 13 Jun 2017 Source: EpiCore Global Surveillance Project [edited] The Ibaraki Prefecture Health Department announced on 13 Jun 2017 that the complaint of more than 3000 students of unusual taste and odor of milk and feeling unwell after consuming the milk provided for lunch on [5 Jun 2017], was caused by a different flavor/odor of the milk provided on that day, which was different from the usual milk provided, not by any defects whatsoever. The Department tested the quality of the remaining milk and inspected the production process of the milk on site. A possible reason for the different flavor/odor of the milk may be that the milk came from one particular farm on that day, and not from multiple farms as on other days ( in Japanese) -- Communicated by: EpiCore Surveillance Project member Dr Masaki Ota Research Institute of Tuberculosis Tokyo Japan ***** [2] In answer to a question by Mod.MPP to Dr. Ota, \"In the absence of identifying a substance, is this considered to be a \"hysterical\" event?\" the following reply was received. Date: Fri 16 Jun 2017 Source: EpiCore Global Surveillance Project [edited] Considering the lack of a specific cause for all of these students feeling unwell and 2 students presenting vomiting and diarrhea, it is possible that it was fueled by mass hysteria. However, no news media has pointed out that possibility. Therefore, I cannot tell if this was the case. It is my understanding that mass hysteria is more common in a hot and/or humid environment. However, the weather on that day in the Mito area was not very hot but was sunny. ---- Communicated by: EpiCore Surveillance Project member Dr Masaki Ota Research Institute of Tuberculosis Tokyo, Japan [ProMED-mail thanks Dr Masaki Ota for these submissions. - Mod.DK A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  .] [", "PORCINE EPIDEMIC DIARRHEA - NORTH AMERICA (03): CANADA (MANITOBA) VACCINATION ***************************************************************************** A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Thu 16 Jun 2017 Source: Manitoba Cooperator [edited] A vaccine that researchers say has been over 90 percent effective against PEDv in clinical trials is on track for another field test in southeast Manitoba. Dr Volker Gerdts, associate director of research at VIDO-InterVac and one of the lead researchers on the project, says the Canadian Food Inspection Agency (CFIA) approved the vaccine for testing under real-world outbreak conditions. Vaccine has been shipped to one producer in southeast Manitoba as a result. \"What we're doing there is essentially assessing the vaccine in the field,\" Gerdts said. A similar trial took place in June 2016, when 3 barns in southeast Manitoba became infected. The vaccine targets the 4 most common strains of PEDv found in North America, including those confirmed in Manitoba. \"It's a vaccine for the sows; so you vaccinate the sows twice before they give birth to the piglets and then they're passing on the immunity to the suckling piglet,\" Gerdts said. Immunity is passed through milk and colostrum, VIDO-InterVac told the Manitoba Co-operator in July 2015. PEDv concern often centres around piglets as the disease may cause 80 to 100 percent mortality in infant animals. As of 2016, it was estimated the disease had cost the North American pork industry over 8 million pigs and USD 400 million since 2013. VIDO-InterVac's vaccine has been in development since late 2013, after the 1st U.S. outbreak caused large-scale losses south of the international border but before the 1st confirmed Canadian case in January 2014. Gerdts and his team quickly completed an animal model for the disease and moved into animal trials. Several vaccine candidates were tested and a front-runner chosen for later trials. Within a year, Gerdts and his team had developed and tested the prospective vaccine. \"I guess it's really a combination of us putting a lot of internal resources onto this project and then, also, being able because of our infrastructure to work with PEDv in high containment,\" he said. VIDO-InterVac's location at the University of Saskatchewan features a 250 000-square-foot facility, one of the largest Level 2 and Level 3 containment research facilities in North America. \"We had the capacity to do a lot of these trials in parallel,\" Gerdts said. By December 2015, the CFIA had approved the vaccine for field testing and, in August 2016, VIDO-InterVac announced it had partnered with European company Huvepharma to commercialize it. Huvepharma could not be reached for comment at the time of printing, but testing under commercial conditions is ongoing, according to the VIDO-InterVac website. Gerdts says it is his hope that producers will be able to access the vaccine as soon as possible. \"It really depends on the regulatory authorities right now and also on our commercial partner who has now taken a license to this vaccine and is commercializing it, which means they have to manufacture the vaccine and then get permission from the regulators to sell it in the U.S. and in Canada,\" he said. News of the potential PEDv buffer was welcomed by the pork sector. Andrew Dickson, Manitoba Pork Council general manager, says other vaccines against PEDv exist, but have met with mixed results. \"They haven't proven totally effective and I'm not sure where the VIDO vaccine is at in terms of getting through the approval process,\" he said. \"There have been some experimental trials with it on the farm to see how it'll work under licence. The latest on-farm trial comes as Manitoba's PEDv record soars to 30, with 20 reported this year [2017] alone.* A total of 6 cases were confirmed in the space of 4 days in the 2nd week of June [2017]. Two new cases were found June 6 within 5 kilometres [31.06 miles] of an already infected site, while a nursery operation outside of any existing disease area was confirmed June 7, the Manitoba Pork Council said. Seven more cases were confirmed June 8-14 [2017]. \"Numerous situations have occurred within the recent outbreak in which service providers have entered a yard without barn personnel being aware and without procedures being followed to protect the disease-free status of the site,\" the pork council reported June 7 [2017]. \"Manitoba Pork urges producers to control access into their yard and be in touch with every person entering the yard to ensure that biosecurity protocols are not breached.\" Biosecurity gaps were also noted during a June 2 call-in town hall. *Article was updated to reflect the current number of PED cases reported. [Byline: Alexis Stockford] -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail [Looks good so far but our fingers are crossed. - Mod.MHJ A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  .] [", "ZIKA VIRUS (13): AMERICAS, RESEARCH, OBSERVATIONS ************************************************* A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases In this update: [1] Cases in various countries: Americas Americas cumulative case numbers Cases in various countries not mentioned above or more recent case numbers. Central America --- Honduras Imported cases with little or no possibility of ongoing mosquito transmission --- USA:  - Case numbers mainland  - Territories and Commonwealth [2] Risk for infants [3] Dysphagia in microcephalic infants [4] Virus load and pregnancy outcomes [5] Fetal brain imaging [6] Ultrasound imaging ****** [1] Cases in various countries Americas --- Americas cumulative case numbers As of 15 Jun 2017 Country / Locally acquired: suspected / Confirmed /Imported / Deaths / Conf. Congenital Syndrome North America: Bermuda / 0 / 0 / 6 / 0 / 0 Canada / 0 / 0 / 507 / 0 / 1 USA / 0 / 225 / 5026 / 0 / 72 Latin America: Mexico / 0 / 8821 / 15 / 0 / 5 Central American Isthmus: Belize / 1294 / 206 / 0 / 0 / 0 Costa Rica / 6422 / 1830 / 32 / 0 / 5 El Salvador / 11 531 / 51 / 0 / 0 / 4 Guatemala / 3678 / 921 / 0 / 0 / 140 Honduras / 32 130 / 302 / 0 / 0 / 4 Nicaragua / 0 / 2060 / 3 / 0 / 2 Panama / 4178 / 969 / 42 / 0 / 8 Latin Caribbean: Cuba / 0 / 187/ 58 / 0 / 0 Dominican Republic / 4906 / 345 / 0 / 0 / 93 French Guiana / 10 500 / 483 / 10 / 0 / 1 Guadeloupe / 30 845 / 382 / 0 / 0 / 5 Haiti / 2955 / 5 / 0 / 0 / 1 Martinique / 36 680 / 21 / 0 / 0 / 7 Puerto Rico / 0 / 40 398 / 137 / 5 / 38 Saint Barthelemy / 990 / 61 / 0 / 0 / 0 Saint Martin / 3280 / 200 / 0 / 0 / 0 Non-Latin Caribbean: Anguilla / 31 / 23 / 1/ 0 / 0 Antigua and Barbuda / 465 / 14 / 2 / 0 / 0 Aruba / 1208 / 468 / 7 / 0 / 0 Bahamas / 0 / 25 / 3/ 0 / 0 Barbados / 705 / 150 / 0 / 0 / 1 Bonaire, St Eustatius and Saba / 235 / 381 / 0 / 0 / 0 Caymans / 232 / 31 / 10 / 0 / 0 Curacao / 2589 / 1259 / 0 / 0 / 0 Dominica / 1154 / 79 / 0 / 0 / 0 Grenada / 335 / 118 / 0 / 0 / 2 Guyana / 0 / 37 / 0 / 0 / 0 Jamaica / 7650 / 203 / 0 / 0 / 0 Montserrat / 18 / 5 / 0 / 0 / 0 Saint Kits and Nevis / 554/ 33 / 0 / 0 / 0 Saint Lucia / 822 / 50 / 0 / 0 / 0 Saint Vincent and the Grenadines / 508 / 83 / 0 / 0 / 0 Sint Maarten / 247 / 147 / 0 / 0 / 0 Suriname / 2768 / 724 / 0 / 4 / 4 Trinidad and Tobago / 0 / 718 / 1 / 0 / 3 Turks and Caicos / 200 / 25 / 3 / 0 / 0 Virgin Islands (UK) / 74 / 53 / 0 / 0 / 0 Virgin Islands (USA) / 1131 / 1017/ 2 / 0 / 0 Andean Area: Bolivia / 1767 / 585 / 4 / 0 / 14 Colombia / 98 161 / 9802 / 0 / 0 / 163 Ecuador / 3842 / 1759 / 15 / 0 / 4 Peru / 5874 / 1218 / 22 / 0 / 0 Venezuela / 59 965 / 2413 / 0 / 0 / 0 [Brazil and] Southern Cone: Brazil / 224 670 / 134 057 / 0 / 11 / 2722 Argentina / 869 / 121 / 40 / 0 / 2 Chile / 0 / 0 / 34 / 0 / 0 Paraguay / 672 / 16 / 0 / 0 / 2 Uruguay / 0 / 0 / 1 / 0 / 0 Totals, Americas / 566 135 / 213 081 / 5981 / 20 / 3303 [Maps showing the location of the affected islands and countries in the Americas mentioned above and below can be accessed at  ; North America at ; Central America ; Caribbean and South America at . - Mod.TY] Cases in various countries not mentioned above or more recent case numbers. Central America --- Honduras. 15 Jun 2017. (reported) 209 cases this year [2017] or whom 8 pregnant. Imported cases with little or no possibility of ongoing mosquito transmission --- USA:  - Case numbers mainland. Zika virus disease in the United States, 1 Jan 2017 - 14 Jun 2017 State/ Symptomatic cases / Viremic blood donors Alabama 3 / 0 Alaska 1 / 0 Arizona 1 / 0 Arkansas 0 / 0 California 14 / 1 Colorado 3 / 0 Connecticut 0 / 0 Delaware 0 / 0 District of Columbia 0 / 0 Florida 15 / 3 Georgia 1 / 0 Hawaii 1 / 0 Idaho 0 / 0 Illinois 4/ 0 Indiana 1 / 0 Iowa 1 / 0 Kansas 2 / 0 Kentucky 1 / 0 Louisiana 1 / 1 Maine 1 / 0 Maryland 3 / 0 Massachusetts 6 / 0 Michigan 6 / 0 Minnesota 0 / 0 Mississippi 2 / 0 Missouri 1 / 0 Montana 0 / 0 Nebraska 1 / 0 Nevada 1 / 0 New Hampshire 0/ 0 New Jersey 2 / 0 New Mexico 0 / 0 New York 26 / 1 North Carolina 3 / 0 North Dakota 0 / 0 Ohio 3 / 0 Oklahoma 0 / 0 Oregon 1 / 0 Pennsylvania 3 / 1 Rhode Island 3 / 0 South Carolina 2 / 0 South Dakota 0 / 0 Tennessee 0 / 0 Texas 11 / 1 Utah 0 / 0 Vermont 3 / 0 Virginia 3 / 0 Washington 2 / 0 West Virginia 0 / 1 Wisconsin 2 / 0 Wyoming 0 / 0 Totals 136 / 9  - Territories and Commonwealth with local transmission: Symptomatic / Blood donors American Samoa 3 / 0 Puerto Rico 465 / 3 US Virgin Islands 37/ 0 Total 505 / 3 [A map of the USA showing the states and territories mentioned above can be accessed at  ] -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail ****** [2] Risk for infants Date: Mon 12 Jun 2017 4:41 AM ET Source: NPR [edited] Zika may have fallen from headlines but the threat remains. And recommendations for pregnant women haven't changed: Pregnant women -- and those trying to get pregnant -- should not travel to places where the Zika virus is circulating. It's just too risky because Zika can cause birth defects. But what about babies? Or kids? Is it safe to travel with them? \"So we don't have tons of data on that particular question,\" says Dr Neil Silverman, at the Center for Fetal Medicine in Los Angeles. But, he says, doctors can offer some recommendations based on what's known about how Zika damages developing brains The biggest concern is with infants. \"I would not take a small newborn -- under 6 months -- to a country at risk for Zika,\" Silverman says. Several studies have shown that Zika can damage a fetus's brain in the 3rd trimester. \"Even when a mother is infected late in pregnancy, adverse outcomes can occur,\" Silverman says. A newborn's brain, at least in terms of development, is similar to that of fetuses late in the 3rd trimester. The problem is that Zika attacks developing brain cells. They're called neural progenitor cells. And newborns' brains are filled with them, just like the brains of fetuses late in pregnancy. \"So I don't think any of us know quite yet what the break point is from being a newborn or a late pregnancy fetus in terms of Zika's risk,\" Silverman adds. By about age 2, many of these developing brain cells are gone. \"And the majority of brain development has already occurred,\" Silverman says. So Zika's danger is likely reduced. \"Kids older than 2 probably don't have any significantly higher risk than an adult who's not pregnant,\" Silverman says. Several studies have supported this hypothesis. In particular, a study published in September followed 158 children, under age 18, with Zika. In all instances, kids had similar symptoms as seen in adults -- a rash, fever and joint pain. None of the children developed Guillain-Barre syndrome, which occurs rarely in Zika patients. [In that study,] 2 of the children were hospitalized. One was 4-years-old, and the other was only one-year-old. All the children recovered with no apparent long-term damage. So when traveling with kids above age 2, Zika doesn't really add more risks, especially if you take a few precautions, says Dr Desiree LaBeaud, an infectious disease pediatrician at Stanford University, who studies mosquito-borne viruses. -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail [The risk of adverse neurological effects of Zika virus infection of neonates has not been well documented, but the advice to avoid that risk offered above should be heeded. - Mod.TY] ****** [3] Dysphagia in microcephalic infants Date: August 2017 [ahead of print] Source: Emerg Infect Dis. https://doi.org/10.3201/eid2308.170354 [edited] Ref. Leal MC, van der Linden V, Bezerra TP, de Valois L, Borges ACG, Antunes MMC, et al. Characteristics of dysphagia in infants with microcephaly caused by congenital Zika virus infection, Brazil, 2015. Abstract We summarize the characteristics of dysphagia in 9 infants in Brazil with microcephaly caused by congenital Zika virus infection. The Schedule for Oral Motor Assessment, fiberoptic endoscopic evaluation of swallowing, and the videofluoroscopic swallowing study were used as noninstrumental and instrumental assessments. All infants had a degree of neurologic damage and showed abnormalities in the oral phase. Of the 9 infants, 8 lacked oral and upper respiratory tract sensitivity, leading to delays in initiation of the pharyngeal phase of swallowing. Those delays, combined with marked oral dysfunction, increased the risk for aspiration of food, particularly liquid foods. Dysphagia resulting from congenital Zika virus syndrome microcephaly can develop in infants >3 months of age and is severe. -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail [A range of physical consequences of teratogenic effects on infants that survive Zika virus infection is beginning to emerge. The social and economic impacts on affected families must be considerable. - Mod.TY] ****** [4] Virus load and pregnancy outcomes Date: Tue 23 May 2017 Source: Clin Infect Dis 2017 cix472. doi: 10.1093/cid/cix472 [edited] UA Halai, M.D., K Nielsen-Saines, M.D., ME Moreira, M.D., Ph.D., et al. Maternal Zika Virus Disease Severity, Virus Load, Prior Dengue Antibodies and their Relationship to Birth Outcomes. Abstract Background: Congenital Zika virus (ZIKV) syndrome is a newly identified condition resulting from infection during pregnancy. We analyzed outcome data from a mother-infant cohort in Rio de Janeiro in order to assess whether clinical severity of maternal ZIKV infection was associated with maternal virus load, prior dengue antibodies or abnormal pregnancy/infant outcomes. Methods: A clinical severity assessment tool was developed based on duration of fever, severity of rash, multisystem involvement and duration of symptoms during ZIKV infection. ZIKV-RNA load was quantified by PCR cycles in blood/ urine. Dengue IgG antibodies were measured at baseline. Adverse outcomes were defined as fetal loss or a live infant with grossly abnormal clinical or brain imaging findings. Regression models were used to study potential associations. Results: 131 ZIKV-PCR positive pregnant women were scored for clinical disease severity, 6 (4.6 percent) had mild disease, 98 (74.8 percent) had moderate disease and 27 (20.6 percent) severe manifestations of ZIKV infection. There were 58 (46.4 percent) abnormal outcomes with 9 fetal losses (7.2 percent) in 125 pregnancies. No associations were found between: disease severity and abnormal outcomes (p=0.961; OR:1.00; 95 percent CI: 0.796- 1.270); disease severity and viral load (p = 0.994); viral load and adverse outcomes (p=0.667; OR:1.02; 95 percent CI: 0.922- 1.135); or existence of prior dengue antibodies (88 percent subjects) with severity score, ZIKV-RNA load or adverse outcomes (p = 0.667; OR 0.78; 95 percent CI : 0.255 - 2.397). Conclusions: Congenital ZIKV syndrome does not appear to be associated with maternal disease severity, ZIKV-RNA load at time of infection or existence of prior dengue antibodies. -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail and Roland H\u00fcbner Superior Health Council Brussels Belgium ****** [5] Fetal brain imaging Date: Tue 6 Jun 2017 Source: Obstetrics & Gynecology doi: 10.1097/AOG.0000000000002105 [edited] Parra-Saavedra, Miguel MD, PhD; Reefhuis, Jennita PhD; Piraquive, Juan Pablo MD, et al. Serial Head and Brain Imaging of 17 Fetuses With Confirmed Zika Virus Infection in Colombia, South America. Abstract Objective: To evaluate fetal ultrasound and magnetic resonance imaging findings among a series of pregnant women with confirmed Zika virus infection to evaluate the signs of congenital Zika syndrome with respect to timing of infection. Methods: We conducted a retrospective case series of pregnant women referred to 2 perinatal clinics in Barranquilla and Ibague, Colombia, who had findings consistent with congenital Zika syndrome and Zika virus infection confirmed in maternal, fetal, or neonatal samples. Serial ultrasound measurements, fetal magnetic resonance imaging results, laboratory results, and perinatal outcomes were evaluated. Results: We describe 17 cases of confirmed prenatal maternal Zika virus infection with adverse fetal outcomes. Among the 14 symptomatic women, the median gestational age for maternal Zika virus symptoms was 10 weeks (range 7-14 weeks of gestation). The median time between Zika virus symptom onset and microcephaly (head circumference less than 3 standard deviations below the mean) was 18 weeks (range 15-24 weeks). The earliest fetal head circumference measurement consistent with microcephaly diagnosis was at 24 weeks of gestation. The earliest sign of congenital Zika syndrome was talipes equinovarus [club foot], which in 2 patients was noted 1st at 19 weeks of gestation. Common findings on fetal magnetic resonance imaging were microcephaly, ventriculomegaly [hydrocephalus], polymicrogyria [too many brain folds, and the folds are unusually small], and calcifications. Conclusion: Our analysis suggests a period of at least 15 weeks between maternal Zika virus infection in pregnancy and development of microcephaly and highlights the importance of serial and detailed neuroimaging. -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail ****** [6] Ultrasound imaging Date: Tue 13 Jun 2017 Source: The Lancet: Child and Adolescent Health DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S2352-4642(17)30001-9 [edited] Bruno Schaub, MD, Mich\u00e8le Gueneret, MD, Eug\u00e9nie Jolivet, MD, Val\u00e9rie Decatrelle, MW, et al. Ultrasound imaging for identification of cerebral damage in congenital Zika virus syndrome: a case series. Summary Background Zika virus is a novel teratogenic agent associated with cerebral anomalies. Because of the challenges associated with assessment of antenatal diagnosis and prognosis in fetuses, screening for other congenital infections mostly relies on ultrasound. We aimed to assess whether a similar approach might be adequate for Zika virus congenital syndrome provided that early markers of infection and adequate timing for screening are established. Methods For this case series we reviewed all pregnant women who had a laboratory-confirmed Zika virus infection in their 1st trimester or early 2nd trimester and abnormal fetal ultrasound findings who were managed at the Pluridisciplinary Center for Prenatal Diagnosis of Martinique during the Zika virus epidemic (1 Jan - 10 Nov 2016) in Martinique, a French Caribbean island. Ultrasound imaging was done with GE Healthcare Voluson E10 and E8 machines with abdominal and vaginal probes. Findings We analyzed 14 cases of pregnant women with confirmed Zika virus infection and fetal abnormalities of the brain, and 31 ultrasound imaging results. Between 16 - 20 weeks of gestation, 4 (33 percent) of 12 fetuses had an abnormal ultrasound examination. Anomalies were detected in 9 (90 percent) of the 10 fetuses from whom ultrasound images were obtained between 20 - 24 weeks of gestation. All 5 remaining fetuses at 24-28 weeks of gestation, and all 4 after 28 weeks, had severe anomalies. Major anomalies identified were ventriculomegaly (12 fetuses, 86 percent), cortical atrophy (11, 79 percent), calcifications (10, 71 percent); particularly located at the corticosubcortical junction), and anomalies of the corpus callosum (ten, 71 percent). Prenatal assessment of head circumference measurement by imaging was not an effective screening tool for congenital Zika virus infection, with microcephaly only identified in 9 (64 percent) fetuses. Interpretation Ultrasound monitoring appears to be a good screening strategy to monitor Zika virus-exposed pregnancies. Public health efforts should focus on scanning at 22-26 weeks of gestation. Identification of ventriculomegaly, cortical atrophy, calcifications, and anomalies of the corpus callosum should prompt laboratory screening for Zika virus. -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail [ A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  .] [", "LEGIONELLOSIS - USA (07): (NEW YORK CITY) ***************************************** A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Fri 16 Jun 2017 3:36 pm ET Source: Patch [edited] One person has died and 6 others were hospitalized after contracting Legionnaires' disease in the Lenox Hill neighborhood [in the New York City borough of Manhattan], the city Department of Health announced [Fri 16 Jun 2017]. The city identified a cluster of outbreaks after the 7 people fell ill with the disease in a span of 11 days, according to the Department of Health. The person who died had \"significant underlying health conditions\" and was in their 90s, the Department of Health said. Four people are currently recovering in the hospital and 2 people have been discharged, city officials said. \"The Health Department has identified an increase and cluster of Legionnaires' disease cases in the Lenox Hill area,\" Health Commissioner Dr Mary T. Bassett said in a statement. \"We have begun an investigation to determine the source of the cluster, focusing on cooling towers in the neighborhood. I urge individuals in this area with respiratory symptoms to seek medical attention right away.\" The Department of Health will test water from cooling towers within a half kilometer radius of the outbreak, but did not say exactly where the outbreak occurred. The department did not immediately respond to a follow-up inquiry from Patch. Legionnaires' symptoms include fever, cough, chills, muscle aches, headache, fatigue, loss of appetite, confusion and diarrhea and generally surface 2 to 10 days after contact with the bacteria _Legionella_. Common culprits in the spread of the _Legionella_ bacteria include cooling towers, whirlpool spas, hot tubs, humidifiers, hot water tanks, and evaporative condensers of large air-conditioning systems, the Department of Health said. The disease cannot be spread from one person to another, the Department of Health said in a statement. Traces of the _Legionella_ bacteria were detected at an East Harlem NYPD precinct earlier this week [week of 11-17 Jun 2017]. [East Harlem is another neighborhood in the New York City borough of Manhattan. A New York police officer was confirmed to have Legionnaires' disease at the 23rd Precinct in Harlem on June 10 [2017] (see ProMED-mail post Legionellosis - USA (05): (FL,NYC,NV http://promedmail.org/post/20170613.5102471). [Byline: Brendan Krisel] -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts [ProMED-mail thanks Denis Green and Juan Angel Ferrer for submitting similar reports. For a discussion of legionellosis, please see my moderator comments in the prior ProMED-mail posts: Legionellosis - USA (04): (AZ) neonatal, underwater birthing http://promedmail.org/post/20170608.5093537; Legionellosis - USA (03): (FL) spa & showers susp, RFI http://promedmail.org/post/20170422.4987402; Legionellosis - USA (02): (MI) genotyping, RFI http://promedmail.org/post/20170217.4846471; and Legionellosis - USA: (NY) commercial spa pool http://promedmail.org/post/20170107.4747816. The state of New York can be located on the HealthMap/ProMED-mail interactive map at . Manhattan can be seen on the map at  . - Mod.ML A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  .] [", "BOTULISM - UKRAINE: FATALITIES, LACK OF ANTITOXIN AVAILABILITY ************************************************************** A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Sat 17 Jun 2017 Source: Outbreak News Today [edited] The number of botulism cases reported in Ukraine during the past 3 months has risen to 62, according to the Deputy Minister of Health of Ukraine on European integration Oksana Sivak. Of this total, 9 have died. Dried fish, both home prepared and commercially prepared has been linked to most of the botulism cases, while officials say some cases have been linked to home prepared stew. A huge problem is the lack of anti-botulinum serum in Ukraine, so there is nothing to help the patients. Most hospitals have no anti-botulinum serum and they haven't had any since 2014, this is when the term of the certificate on state registration of the drug with Russian production ended. The Health Ministry is planning to purchase serum from botulism through international organizations, according to the Ukraine News Agency. \"According to the current legislation of Ukraine, neither the Ministry of Health nor other health agencies can buy these medicines unless they are registered. So now the only legal way is to purchase necessary drugs through international organizations,\" the ministry said. In Kiev, a legal probe into several cases due to \"a violation of rules and standards established for the prevention of epidemic and other infectious diseases and mass non-communicable diseases ( poisoning) and deal with them, if such actions caused or could knowingly cause the spread of these diseases\" , according to a glavcom report (computer translated). Food borne botulism is a severe intoxication caused by eating the preformed toxin present in contaminated food. Food borne botulism occurs when the bacterium _Clostridium botulinum_ is allowed to grow and produce toxin in food that is later eaten without sufficient heating or cooking to inactivate the toxin. Botulinum toxin is one of the most potent neurotoxins known. Typically in a few hours to several days after you eat the contaminated food you will start to show the classic symptoms; blurred vision, dry mouth, and difficulty in swallowing. Gastrointestinal symptoms may or may not occur. If untreated, the paralysis descends through the body starting at the shoulders and working its way down. The most serious complication of botulism is respiratory failure where it is fatal in up to 10 percent of people. It may take months before recovery is complete. If the disease is caught early enough it can be treated with antitoxin. If paralysis and respiratory failure happen, the person may be on a ventilator for several weeks. [Byline: Robert Herriman] -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts [The lack of availability of polyvalent botulism antiserum no doubt can contribute to the deaths here. The antiserum can inactivate toxin that has not yet bound to its target at the neuromuscular junction. The method of diagnosis of botulism is not stated here. Individual cases of the paralysis can be confused with other diseases, but a cluster of such cases is certainly likely to be botulism. Type E botulism is the type frequently associated with fish products (1). Classically, botulism is a foodborne disease caused by the ingestion of preformed toxin, although there also exists wound botulism (in which _Clostridium botulinum_ spores germinate in a wound), and infant botulism (in which the spores germinate in the intestinal tract). Types A, B, and E of human botulism are the commonest. Although all types have a similar symptom complex, Hughes and colleagues report that type E is much more likely to produce initial lethargic mental status and more autonomic dysfunction (2). References ---------- 1. Weber JT, Hibbs RG, Darwish A, et al. A massive outbreak of type E botulism associated with traditional salted fish in Cairo. J Infect Dis 1993; 167: 451-4. 2. Hughes JM, Hatheway CL, Ostroff SM: Botulism. In: Scheld WM, Whitley RJ, Durack DT, editors. Infections of the central nervous system. 2nd edition. Philadelphia: Lippincott-Raven, 1997, 615-28. - Mod.LL A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  .] [", "HEPATITIS A - CHILE: (ANTOFAGASTA) STREET FOOD ********************************************** A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Wed 14 June 2017 Source: ADN Radio [In Spanish, translated & edited by Mod.JG] There is concern in Antofagasta region because of an increase in the number of cases of viral hepatitis A. According to 'El Mercurio' (one of the main Chilean newspapers), there are 74 affected persons, who may have acquired the disease because of purchasing and consuming food from street vendors. In recent times, there has been a significant increase in arepas (sort of cornmeal rolls), pizzas and grilled beef, amongst other products, being freely sold in the streets. In this respect, Ms Lila Vergara, a local Health Officer, declared that \"our hypothesis is that (the cause of the viral hepatitis A outbreak) is food consumption from unauthorized places, such as purchasing this stuff from street vendors\". -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail [Antofagasta ( ) is a port city in northern Chile, about 1100 kilometers (700 mi) north of Santiago. It is the capital of Antofagasta Province and Antofagasta Region. Formerly part of Bolivia, Antofagasta was captured by Chile in the War of the Pacific (1879-83), and the transfer of sovereignty was finalized in the 1904 Treaty of Peace and Friendship between the 2 countries. - Mod.LL A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  .] [", "LASSA FEVER - WEST AFRICA (21): NIGERIA *************************************** A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Fri 9 Jun 2017 Source: Nigeria Centre for Disease Control [NCDC] Weekly Epidemiological Report 7(21) [edited] 1. Lassa fever Please note that the data reflects the routine reports i.e. all suspected cases including the laboratory positive and negative cases 1.1. One suspected case of Lassa fever was reported from Abeokuta South LGAs (Ogun States) in week 21, 2017 compared with 24 suspected cases with one Lab. Confirmed and one death (CFR, 4.2 percent) from Esan Central LGA (Edo State) at the same period in 2016. 1.2. Laboratory results of the one suspected case was negative (Ogun - 1). 1.3. Between weeks 1 and 21 (2017), 263 suspected Lassa fever cases with 59 laboratory confirmed cases and 48 deaths (CFR, 18.25 percent) from 54 LGAs (20 States) were reported compared with 716 suspected cases with 71 laboratory confirmed cases and 87 deaths (CFR, 12.15 percent) from 125 LGAs (27 States) during the same period in 2016 (Figure 1). 1.4. Between weeks 1 and 52 2016, 921 suspected Lassa fever cases with 109 laboratory confirmed cases and 119 deaths (CFR, 12.92 percent) from 144 LGAs (28 States and FCT) were reported compared with 430 suspected cases with 25 laboratory confirmed cases and 40 deaths (CFR, 9.30 percent) from 37 LGAs (14 States and FCT) during the same period in 2015 (Figure 2). 1.5. Investigation and active case search ongoing in affected States with coordination of response activities by the NCDC with support from partners. 1.5.1. National Lassa Fever Working Group meeting and weekly National Surveillance and Outbreak Response meeting on-going at NCDC to keep abreast of the current Lassa fever situation in the country. 1.5.2. Response materials for VHFs prepositioned across the country by NCDC at the beginning of the dry season 1.5.3. New VHF guidelines have been developed by the NCDC (Interim National Viral Haemorrhagic Fevers Preparedness guidelines and Standard Operating Procedures for Lassa fever management) 1.5.4. Ongoing reclassification of reported Lassa fever cases 1.5.5. Ongoing review of the variables for case-based surveillance for VHF 1.5.6. VHF case-based forms completed by affected States are being entered into the new VHF management system. This system allows for the creation of a VHF database for the country. 1.5.7. NCDC team sent to Edo State to support Lassa fever data harmonization and Updating of VHF case-based management database 1.5.8. Confirmed cases are being treated at identified treatment/isolation centres across the States with Ribavirin and necessary supportive management also instituted 1.5.9. Onsite support was earlier provided to Ogun, Nasarawa, Taraba, Ondo and Borno States by the NCDC and partners 1.5.10. Offsite support provided by NCDC/partners in in all affected States 1.5.11. States are enjoined to intensify surveillance Figure 1: Map of Nigeria showing areas affected by Lassa fever, week 1- 21, 2016 and 2017 Figure 2: Map of Nigeria showing areas affected by Lassa fever, week 1 - 53, 2015 and week 1 - 52, 2016 Table of cases by state, cumulative data weeks 1-20 [1 Jan-19 May 2017]: State: Cases / Lab Confirmed / Deaths Adamawa: 6 / 0 / 2 Bauchi: 9 / 3 / 3 Cross River: 6 / 0 / 0 Ebonyi: 4 / 1 / 1 Edo: 91 / 20 / 9 Enugu: 1 / 1 / 1 FCT: 2 / 0 / 0 Gombe: 15 / 0 / 1 Jigawa: 1 / 0 / 0 Kadun: 1 / 0 / 0 Kano: 23 / 2 / 10 Kebbi: 1 / 0 / 1 Kogi: 2 / 1 / 1 Nasarawa: 28 / 6 / 2 Ogun: 9 / 1 / 0 Ondo: 13 / 6 / 2 Plateau: 7 / 5 / 5 Rivers: 6 / 1 / 0 Taraba: 37 / 12 / 9 Yobe: 1 / 0 / 1 262 59 48 Total: 263 / 59 / 48 -- Communicated by: Olutayo Olajide Babalobi Lecturer and Consultant Epizootiologist (One Health, Participatory Epizootiology and Veterinary ICT Research Group) Department of Veterinary Public Health and Preventive Medicine Faculty of Veterinary Medicine University of Ibadan Ibadan, Nigeria [There is just one additional case since the last epidemiological report of the previous week. The numbers of cases of Lassa fever have been continuing to slowly increase in Nigeria however. As noted in earlier comments, Lassa fever remains a problem in Nigeria because the virus is endemic there. Virus transmission to humans occurs when people are in contact with the reservoir rodent host, the multimammate mouse (in the genus _Mastomys_) or their excreta. Transmission also occurs in health facilities when personal protective equipment is not employed and barrier nursing practices are not adequate to protect staff from blood and secretions of infected patients. Effective treatment of Lassa virus has been a challenge. There may be an effective vaccine on the horizon. A press release sent to us by Leann Bailey stated that utilizing antibodies from Zalgen and Tulane University (Tulane) coupled to the Lassa virus GPC, researchers at The Scripps Research Institute (TSRI) and other VHFC and VIC affiliated organizations successfully characterized the 1st high-resolution image of an arenavirus glycoprotein in its native trimer structure, expanding the capability for developing significantly more effective medical countermeasures. Several Zalgen/Tulane antibodies have demonstrated effectiveness as immunotherapeutics. Zalgen's 1st immunotherapeutic candidate, Arevirumab-3 demonstrated 100 percent efficacy in treating infected animals using 2 relevant model systems, and will advance to pre-clinical development, with projected Phase I studied within 3 years. The newly solved Lassa virus GPC trimer will also enable the design of better vaccines to elicit successful antibodies in recipients. Images of _Mastomys_ mice, the rodent reservoir of Lass fever virus, can be seen at . Maps of Nigeria can be accessed at  and  . - Mod.TY A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  .] [", "AVIAN INFLUENZA, HUMAN (58): CHINA, H7N9 **************************************** A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases In this update: [1] Hong Kong weekly report [2] Jiangxi [3] Guangxi [4] Hebei [5] Hong Kong CHP [6] Viral Mutations ****** [1] Hong Kong weekly report Date: 13 Jun 2017 Source: The Poultry Site [edited] In its weekly report, Hong Kong's Centre for Health Protection (CHP) last week confirmed 12 H7N9 avian flu cases reported from China's mainland from 2-8 Jun 2017. The previous 2 weeks saw 8 and 9 cases reported, respectively, so the update reflects a small uptick. Nine of the 12 cases had known exposure to poultry, and one patient was listed as a 4-year-old. That case is notable because H7N9 infections in children are uncommon. Eight men and 4 women contracted the virus, and their ages range from 4 to 68 years. The patients reported symptom onset from 20 May to 3 Jun 2017. Three of the cases are from Beijing, and officials said they were likely imported from other provinces. A new case from Shaanxi province was likely imported from Inner Mongolia province, the 2nd such case in Shaanxi in the last 2 weeks. There were 2 cases each reported in Anhui, Chongqing and Henan, and one each from Jiangsu and Shandong. The CHP said the new cases warrant a call for strict personal hygiene for travelers to China's mainland. Travelers to the mainland or other affected areas have been told to avoid visiting live-poultry markets or farms. \"They should be alert to the presence of backyard poultry when visiting relatives and friends,\" the CHP report said. \"They should strictly observe personal and hand hygiene when visiting any place with live poultry.\" In other H7N9 news, Avian Flu Diary, an infectious disease tracking blog, posted a translated report from the Chinese Ministry of Agriculture that described a large poultry die-off in Inner Mongolia province, which reported its 1st poultry outbreak just a few weeks ago. Of almost 60 000 laying hens, more than 35 000 died, the report said. A national reference lab confirmed H7N9 on 8 Jun 2017, and the large number of poultry deaths suggests that the virus is highly pathogenic. At least 3 human cases of H7N9 have been traced back to Inner Mongolia province in June 2017. -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail Hong Kong HealthMap: ] ****** [2] Jiangxi Date: 14 Jun 2017 Source: FIC (Flu Information Centre/Flu in China) [edited] Jiangxi province reported one new human H7N9 AIV case from 5-11 Jun 2017, according to the HFPC of Jiangsu province. The patient was reported in Xuzhou city. -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail [HealthMap for Jiangxi province: ] ****** [3] Guangxi Date: 17 Jun 2017 Source: FIC (Flu Information Centre/Flu in China) [edited] During the period between 9-15 Jun 2017, the Guangxi Zhuang Autonomous Region reported one human H7N9 AIV case (55-year-old male) in Baise city. The Guangxi Zhuang Autonomous Region has reported a total of 27 human H7N9 AIV cases (including 14 fatal, 13 discharged from hospital) since 2017. -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail [HealthMap for Guangxi Autonomous Region:  ] ****** [4] Hebei Date: 18 Jun 2017 Source: FIC (Flu Information Centre/Flu in China) [edited] During the period between 9-15 Jun 2017, Hebei province reported one human H7N9 AIV case. The case (54-year-old male) was reported in Chengde city (exported to Beijing). -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail [HealthMap for Hebei province: ] ****** [5] Hong Kong CHP Date: 16 Jun 2017 Source: Gov. Hong Kong SAR Press Release [edited] The Centre for Health Protection (CHP) of the Department of Health today [16 Jun 2017] is monitoring a notification from the National Health and Family Planning Commission that 5 additional human cases of avian influenza A(H7N9), including one death, were recorded from 9-15 Jun 2017, and strongly urged the public to maintain strict personal, food and environmental hygiene both locally and during travel. The 4 male patients and one female, who came from Beijing, Guangxi, Guizhou, Hunan and Zhejiang and were aged from 41 to 68, had onset from 25 Apr to 6 Jun 2017. Among them, 3 were known to have exposure to poultry or poultry markets. Travellers to the mainland or other affected areas must avoid visiting wet markets, live poultry markets or farms. They should be alert to the presence of backyard poultry when visiting relatives and friends. They should also avoid purchase of live or freshly slaughtered poultry, and avoid touching poultry/birds or their droppings. They should strictly observe personal and hand hygiene when visiting any place with live poultry. Travellers returning from affected areas should consult a doctor promptly if symptoms develop and inform the doctor of their travel history for prompt diagnosis and treatment of potential diseases. It is essential to tell the doctor if they have seen any live poultry during travel, which may imply possible exposure to contaminated environments. This will enable the doctor to assess the possibility of avian influenza and arrange necessary investigations and appropriate treatment in a timely manner. While local surveillance, prevention, and control measures are in place, the CHP will remain vigilant and work closely with the World Health Organization and relevant health authorities to monitor the latest developments. The CHP's Port Health Office conducts health surveillance measures at all boundary control points. Thermal imaging systems are in place for body temperature checks on inbound travellers. Suspected cases will be immediately referred to public hospitals for follow-up. The display of posters and broadcasting of health messages in departure and arrival halls as health education for travellers is underway. The travel industry and other stakeholders are being regularly updated on the latest information. The public should maintain strict personal, hand, food and environmental hygiene and take heed of the advice below while handling poultry: - Avoid touching poultry, birds, animals or their droppings; - When buying live chickens, do not touch them and their droppings. Do not blow at their bottoms. Wash eggs with detergent if soiled with faecal matter and cook and consume them immediately. Always wash hands thoroughly with soap and water after handling chickens and eggs; - Eggs should be cooked well until the white and yolk become firm. Do not eat raw eggs or dip cooked food into any sauce with raw eggs. Poultry should be cooked thoroughly. If there is pinkish juice running from the cooked poultry or the middle part of its bone is still red, the poultry should be cooked again until fully done; - Wash hands frequently, especially before touching the mouth, nose or eyes, before handling food or eating, and after going to the toilet, touching public installations or equipment such as escalator handrails, elevator control panels or door knobs, or when hands are dirtied by respiratory secretions after coughing or sneezing; and - Wear a mask if fever or respiratory symptoms develop, when going to a hospital or clinic, or while taking care of patients with fever or respiratory symptoms. The public may visit the CHP's pages for more information: the avian influenza page, the weekly Avian Influenza Report, global statistics and affected areas of avian influenza, the Facebook Page, and the YouTube Channel. -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail Hong Kong HealthMap: ] ****** [6] Viral Mutations Date: 16 Jun 2017 Source: FIC (Flu Information Centre/Flu in China) [edited] de Vries RP, Peng W, Grant OC, Thompson AJ, Zhu X,. 3 mutations switch H7N9 influenza to human-type receptor specificity. PLoS Pathog 13(6): e1006390. ----------------------------------- \"The avian H7N9 influenza outbreak in 2013 resulted from an unprecedented incidence of influenza transmission to humans from infected poultry. The majority of human H7N9 isolates contained a hemagglutinin (HA) mutation (Q226L) that has previously been associated with a switch in receptor specificity from avian-type (NeuAc\u03b12-3Gal) to human-type (NeuAc\u03b12-6Gal), as documented for the avian progenitors of the 1957 (H2N2) and 1968 (H3N2) human influenza pandemic viruses. While this raised concern that the H7N9 virus was adapting to humans, the mutation was not sufficient to switch the receptor specificity of H7N9, and has not resulted in sustained transmission in humans. To determine if the H7 HA was capable of acquiring human-type receptor specificity, we conducted mutation analyses. Remarkably, 3 amino acid mutations conferred a switch in specificity for human-type receptors that resembled the specificity of the 2009 human H1 pandemic virus, and promoted binding to human trachea epithelial cells.\" Author summary -------------- \"Influenza A virus of the H7N9 subtype continues to cross the species barrier from poultry to humans. This zoonotic ability is remarkable as the virus retains specificity to avian-type receptors. To effectively transmit between humans, the virus needs to acquire human-type receptor specificity. In this study, we show that recombinant H7 proteins need 3 amino acid mutations to change specificity to human-type receptors. Although we are not allowed to assess if these mutations would lead to efficient transmission in the ferret model, this knowledge will aid in surveillance. If these amino acid mutations are observed to arise during natural selection in humans, timely actions could be taken.\" The full article can be accessed at:  . -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail [According to this publication, the authors have demonstrated in vitro that several alternative 3-amino-acid mutations (V186G/K-K193T-G228S or V186N-N224K-G228S) can switch the receptor specificity of the H7N9 HA from avian- to human-type, a property required for transmission in humans and ferrets. Of these highlighted mutations, only isolated examples of 186G and 193N have, to date, been actually reported in H7 avian isolates. These mutants have shown profound loss of binding to avian-type (\u03b12-3 linked) receptors, and increased binding to human-type (\u03b12-6 linked) receptors in both glycan microarrays and glycan ELISA-type avidity assays as reported in this paper. Thus, there are multiple ways for H7N9 to obtain human-type receptor specificity. The bottom line is that there is need to continuously monitor the evolutionary changes in the virus and look out for any of the mutational events mentioned above or otherwise. - Mod.UBA A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  .] [", "CONJUNCTIVITIS - TURKS AND CAICOS ISLANDS ***************************************** A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: 12 Jun 2017 Source: TC weekly News [edited] The Ministry of Health is advising the public of an increase in the number of cases of conjunctivitis in the Turks & Caicos Islands [TCI]. Conjunctivitis, also called \"pink eye,\" is defined as an inflammation of the conjunctiva and can be caused by viruses, bacteria, or an allergy. It can affect children and adults. Viral conjunctivitis is typically caused by a virus that can also cause the common cold. A person may have symptoms of conjunctivitis alone or as part of a general cold syndrome like fever, a sore throat and runny nose. Viral conjunctivitis is highly contagious; usually people catch it from touching something that has been in contact with an infected person's eye (e.g. door handle, towel or pillow case), and then that person touches his or her eyes. Some of the most common symptoms of conjunctivitis are pink or red eyes; the eyes might secrete a gooey liquid or become itchy or burn, get stuck shut, especially when you 1st wake up. These symptoms tend to last for several days. The ministry stated in a press release: \"The treatment depends on the cause. When pink eye is caused by a virus, antibiotics will not help. You can use warm or cool compresses to relieve the pain and irritation in the eyes. \"Most cases of pink eye go away on their own without treatment, but it is best to see your primary care physician if you are experiencing these symptoms so that you can be treated properly. \"Simple hygiene measures can help minimise transmission to others. Adults or children with bacterial or viral conjunctivitis should not share handkerchiefs, tissues, towels, cosmetics, or bed sheets/pillows with uninfected family or friends. Hand washing is an essential and highly effective way to prevent the spread of infection. Hands should be wet with water and plain soap, and rubbed together for 15 to 30 seconds. \"Teach children to wash their hands before and after eating and after touching the eyes, coughing or sneezing. Alcohol-based hand rubs are a good alternative for disinfecting hands if a sink is not available.\" Anyone with viral conjunctivitis should remain home from school and work to avoid spreading the virus to others. -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail [The report above does not specify any laboratory confirmation of the conjunctivitis cases. Conjunctivitis can result from many causes, including viruses, bacteria, allergens, contact lens use (especially the extended-wear type), chemicals, fungi, and certain diseases. Viral conjunctivitis can be caused by the following viruses, with adenoviruses being the most common cause: adenoviruses, picornaviruses (particularly enterovirus 70 and coxsackievirus A24), measles virus, and several herpes viruses. Viral conjunctivitis is highly contagious. Most viruses that cause conjunctivitis are spread through hand-to-eye contact by hands or objects that are contaminated with the infectious virus. Hands can become contaminated by coming into contact with infectious tears, eye discharge, fecal matter, or respiratory discharges. Many of the viruses that cause conjunctivitis may be associated with an upper respiratory tract infection, cold, or sore throat. - Mod.UBA A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  .] [", "EBOLA UPDATE (29): NEWS, VACCINE, RESEARCH, FUNDING *************************************************** A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases In this update: [1] News  DR Congo: Research Triangle Park response  DR Congo: new suspected case [2] Vaccine  Advances in Ebola virus vaccination  Merck vaccine [3] Research  Modeling zoonotic factors  Risk factors  Delta peptide  Survivors' eyes [4] Funding  Nigeria  Sierra Leone ****** [1] News 13 Jun 2017 DRC: RTI International addressing Ebola outbreak in Democratic Republic of Congo [Research Triangle Park, NC - With funding from the U.S. Centers for Disease Control [CDC] and Prevention, RTI International is responding to the [Ebola virus disease (EVD)] outbreak in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (DRC). EVD, a severe, often fatal illness in humans, was 1st discovered in DRC (formerly Zaire) in 1976. The virus is transmitted to people from wild animals and spreads in the human population through human-to-human transmission. The average EVD case fatality rate is around 50 percent. There have been 11 confirmed cases of EVD in the United States, originating from outbreaks in Africa. This is the 8th outbreak in DRC since the disease was discovered. On 11 May 2017, the Ministry of Health declared an EVD outbreak in the Bas-Uele Province of Northern DRC, based on one laboratory-confirmed case and a cluster of patients with EVD-like symptoms. The latest World Health Organization [WHO] update reports 2 confirmed cases, 3 probable cases, and 14 suspected cases of EVD, with another 101 contacts under daily monitoring. As the leading surveillance partner for CDC's Global Health Security Agenda activities in DRC, RTI rapidly mobilized to support the Ministry of Health's EVD response activities. As one of the 1st responders to the outbreak epicenter, RTI is part of the Surveillance Coordination Committee, working with epidemiologists and lab specialists from the Ministry of Health, WHO, Medecins Sans Frontieres, and other partners to strengthen local capacity to detect, report, and manage information about suspected EVD cases and their contacts. \"Strengthening a country's ability to prevent and respond to epidemics like Ebola is essential not just for the affected country, but for everyone around the globe,\" said Pia MacDonald, Ph.D., senior epidemiologist at RTI. \"We saw in 2014 just how fast an EVD outbreak can spread worldwide. It's essential that we work together to stop this threat as quickly as possible.\"] ...more.. 15 Jun 2017: DRC reports new suspected case of Ebola [The World Health Organization (WHO) African regional office released a new situation report on the current outbreak of [Ebola virus disease (EVD)]in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (DRC), noting one additional suspected case of the viral disease since the last report on [9 Jun 2017]. In the last week, DRC health officials have investigated 33 suspected cases, with only one being a possible infection. The last confirmed case was isolated on [17 May 2017]. To date, there have been 5 confirmed, 3 probable, and 1 suspected case. 90 percent of simulated modeling predictions show no more cases in the next 30 days, the WHO said. In addition, the overall national risk of [EVD] has been downgraded from \"high\" to \"moderate.\" All cases have been in the Likati Health Zone, a remote part of northern DRC.] [This suspected case was one of the 33 suspected cases. - Mod.LK] ****** [2] Vaccine 9 Jun 2017: Advances in Ebola virus vaccination [The Ebola virus outbreak in western Africa between 2013 and 2016 was the largest and deadliest since the discovery of the virus in 1976. The epidemic provided the impetus to fast-track several promising vaccines into clinical trials during the tail-end of the outbreak, including the rVSVG-ZEBOV-GP viral vector vaccine, which was used in ring vaccination trials in Guinea.]...more... Citation. Clarke E.C., S. B. Bradfute . (9 Jun 2017). Advances in Ebola virus vaccination. The Lancet Infectious Diseases, DOI:  ] 14 Jun 2017: Response to Merck's Ebola vaccine lasts at least a year, study finds [In a Phase 3 trial in West Africa, Merck's Ebola vaccine rVSV-ZEBOV has already shown it can elicit a quick immune response. Now, a new study in the U.S. found that the vaccine's protective qualities can last for at least a year. A team of scientists from Merck and partner NewLink Genetics conducted a Phase 1-b trial at 8 U.S. study sites on 512 healthy adults. All 7 doses produced a robust antibody response, according to the investigators, and neutralizing antibodies persisted for at least a year after immunization. Adverse events included joint pain and headache, but most were mild to moderate and passed quickly. Based on the results, the team confirmed the selection of the 2 x 107 plaque-forming-unit dose used in the previous Phase 3 outbreak clinical trial. In that 7651-participant \"ring vaccination\" trial, Merck's shot protected 100 percent of vaccinated subjects from Ebola infection within 6-10 days, interim results showed; full results are expected later this year [2017]. While Merck hasn't yet submitted its shot to regulatory agencies, health officials have considered using the vaccine to combat a recent Ebola outbreak detected in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. Local health authorities approved rVSV-ZEBOV for emergency use under trial settings, but the government is holding off on deploying the experimental vaccine, and deployment is not yet advised by the World Health Organization, according to the Wall Street Journal. Earlier this month [June 2017], a Doctors Without Borders spokesperson said preparations for vaccination are underway \"in order to rapidly initiate a ring vaccination should an [Ebola virus disease] laboratory-confirmed case be identified outside of the already defined contacts.\" Merck has said it will submit its vaccine for approval by the end of 2017. Citation. Heppner DG Jr et al. Safety and immunogenicity of the rVSVG-ZEBOV-GP Ebola virus vaccine candidate in healthy adults: a phase 1b randomised, multicentre, double-blind, placebo-controlled, dose-response study. Lancet Infect Dis. 2017 Jun 9. pii: S1473-3099(17)30313-4. doi: 10.1016/S1473-3099(17)30313-4. [Epub ahead of print] ****** [3] Research -------- 12 Jun 2017: Modeling the Ebola zoonotic dynamics: Interplay between enviroclimatic factors and bat ecology [Citation. Buceta J., Johnson K. (12 Jun 2017). Modeling the Ebola zoonotic dynamics: Interplay between enviroclimatic factors and bat ecology. PLoS One, Abstract. Understanding Ebola necessarily requires the characterization of the ecology of its main enzootic reservoir, i.e. bats, and its interplay with seasonal and enviroclimatic factors. Here we present a SIR compartmental model where we implement a bidirectional coupling between the available resources and the dynamics of the bat population in order to understand their migration patterns. Our compartmental modeling approach and simulations include transport terms to account for bats mobility and spatiotemporal climate variability. We hypothesize that environmental pressure is the main driving force for bats' migration and our results reveal the appearance of sustained migratory waves of Ebola virus infected bats coupled to resources availability. Ultimately, our study can be relevant to predict hot spots of Ebola outbreaks in space and time and suggest conservation policies to mitigate the risk of spillovers.] 14 Jun 2017: Region level risk factors for the Ebola virus disease in West Africa. [Citation. Levy B., Odoi A. (14 Jun 2017). Region level risk factors for the Ebola virus disease in West Africa. PeerJPrints. ---Background. The Ebola virus disease (EVD) is a highly infectious disease that has claimed over 25 000 cases in the past 50 years. While many past outbreaks of EVD resulted in relatively few incidents, the 2014 outbreak in West Africa was the most deadly occurrence of EVD to date producing over 15 000 confirmed cases. --Objective. In this study, we relate total confirmed case counts of EVD to predictor variables at the region level in Sierra Leone, Liberia, and Guinea. --Methods. We used a Poisson framework and negative binomial framework to relate the predictors to the outcome. A spatial analysis was conducted to further our understanding and help interpret results. --Results. Results indicate that the percent of the population living in urban areas, percent of household with a bad quality or no toilet, and percent of married men working in blue collar jobs protect against the transmission of EVD. Our study also shows that mean years of education contributes to increased case counts of the disease. --Conclusion. Each significant predictor are associated with the types of dynamics that either protect against, or exacerbate, the spread of EVD. While having limited contact with the bodily fluids of others, reduced person-to-person contact, and isolated population clusters protect against the spread of EVD, the types of daily interactions an educated individual will experience leads to higher incidence rates. This information can be used to identify potential transmission routes and prevent future outbreak of this deadly disease. ...more...] 12 Jun 2017. Small protein found in Ebola virus may be responsible for its rapid spread, study says [A Tulane University-lead study recently revealed how a small protein found within the Ebola virus may be responsible for the virus' ability to spread rapidly from person-to-person. Ebola-infected patients are known to produce large quantities of a compound known as delta peptide. \"Our leading hypothesis is that the delta peptide affects the gastrointestinal (GI) tract by damaging cells after its release from infected cells,\" William Wimley, professor of biochemistry and molecular biology at the Tulane University School of Medicine, said. \"This effect may be a major contributor to the severe GI illness of patients with the Ebola virus.\"...-more] 16 Jun 2017: Ebola leaves unique scar inside survivors' eyes In some Ebola [Ebola virus disease (EVD] survivors, EVD leaves a unique scar at the back of the eye that can be seen long after they are cured of the disease, according to a new study. Researchers analyzed information from 82 [EVD survivors] in Sierra Leone and 105 people who lived in the area but never had EVD. All participants took a vision test and had the back of their eyes examined with an ophthalmoscope. Among EVD survivors, more than a year had passed, on average, between the time they were cured of the disease and the time of the eye examination. When asked to read letters on an eye chart, the EVD survivors tended to perform just as well as those who'd never had the disease, meaning their infection didn't seem affect their vision.] However, approximately 15 percent of EVD survivors had a unique scar on their retina, the light-sensitive tissue at the back of the eye. The people who had never contracted EVD did not have this particular type of scar, the study found. This scar, \"often resembling a diamond or wedge shape, appears unique,\" the researchers said. The scar was next to the eye's optic disc, the spot where nerve fibers exit the eye to connect to the brain. This suggests that the EVD virus enters the eye by traveling along the optic nerve, the researchers said. Previous studies have found that up to 60 percent of Ebola survivors experience eye symptoms, including eye inflammation and temporary vision loss, but little is known about the patients' long-term vision outcomes, the researchers said. About 7 percent of the EVD survivors in the new study had white cataracts, or cloudy areas in the lens of the eye that can affect vision. In contrast, no white cataracts were found in the participants who'd never had Ebola, the researchers said. However, it's not clear whether EVD survivors could safely have surgery to remove cataracts, because there is concern that the virus can linger in the eye and might pose a risk to doctors performing the surgery. But in the new study, the researchers tested the eye fluid of 2 Ebola survivors with cataracts, and the fluid tested negative for the virus. This finding suggests that Ebola does not necessarily remain in eye fluid in survivors with cataracts, and that in some patients, cataract surgery could be performed safely, the researchers said. Citation. Steptoe P.J., Scott J.T., Baxter J.M. (July 2017). Novel Retinal Lesion in Ebola Survivors, Sierra Leone, 2016. Emerg Infec Dis 23(7)--July 2017. Abstract. We conducted a case-control study in Freetown, Sierra Leone, to investigate ocular signs in Ebola virus disease (EVD) survivors. A total of 82 EVD survivors with ocular symptoms and 105 controls from asymptomatic civilian and military personnel and symptomatic eye clinic attendees underwent ophthalmic examination, including widefield retinal imaging. Snellen visual acuity was under 6/7.5 in 75.6 percent (97.5 percent CI 63 percent-85.7 percent) of EVD survivors and 75 percent (97.5 percent CI 59.1 percent-87.9 percent) of controls. Unilateral white cataracts were present in 7.4 percent (97.5 percent CI 2.4 percent-16.7 percent) of EVD survivors and no controls. Aqueous humor from 2 EVD survivors with cataract but no anterior chamber inflammation were PCR-negative for Zaire EVD virus, permitting cataract surgery. A novel retinal lesion following the anatomic distribution of the optic nerve axons occurred in 14 percent (97.5 percent CI 7.1 percent-25.6 percent) of EVD survivors and no controls, suggesting neuronal transmission as a route of ocular entry.] ****** [4] Funding 12 Jun 2017 Nigeria: Fear of Ebola: Why Nigeria lost USD 186 million to the Ebola outbreak [Ebola viral disease [EVD] spread across several African states including Nigeria in 2014. After 93 days and several deaths, Nigeria was declared Ebola free on 20 Oct 2014. Nevertheless, its impact on the economy lingered on as revealed by a recent study suggesting that the fear of Ebola and widespread misinformation cost Nigeria USD 186 million. This may have had a huge impact on the economy. This 1st in-depth look on how the fear of Ebola affected the economy was recently published in BMJ global health [Bali S, Stewart KA, Pate MA. Long shadow of fear in an epidemic: fearonomic effects of Ebola on the private sector in Nigeria. BMJ Global Health 2016;1:e000111. doi:10.1136/bmjgh-2016-000111, a paper from 2016, but important in that it points out the far reaching impact of perception of a disease. - Mod.LK]. According to the [study] led by Sulzhan Bali, the fear of EVD had a lot of impact on the following sectors of the Nigerian economy: Health services; Hospitality and retail; Telecoms; Aviation; Consumer goods; Pharmaceuticals; Oil and gas. Using in-depth interviews and surveys in Lagos, Nigeria, the researchers found that lack of information and misinformation contributed significantly to the fear of Ebola, which had ripple effects on the economy. ...-more] 13 Jun 2017 Sierra Leone: ADRA Sierra Leone directs USD 80 000 of relief to Ebola survivors [The Sierra Leone office of the Adventist Development and Relief Agency [ADRA] has partnered with US-based aid agency Cross International to provide relief to EVD survivors in the country. Two containers of goods, worth a combined USD 80 000, were directed to EVD survivors. Sierra Leone's capitol Freetown's Concord Times reports that EVD survivors in 8 districts of Sierra Leone were being sent new clothing, fortified rice, soy blend and water. ADRA Sierra Leone Director David Kabia confirmed that some of the supplies had already reached the recipients. ...- more] [Compiled by: Celeste Whitlow ] -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail Rapporteur Mary Marshall [A map of the affected area in northeast Congo DR can be seen at  and a HealthMap/ProMED-mail map of Congo DR at  . A HealthMap of Nigeria can be found at  . HealthMap/ProMED-mail maps: Liberia Guinea Sierra Leone . - Mod.LK] [", "ANNOUNCEMENTS (04): WHO VIDEO COURSES ON HEALTH EMERGENCIES FOR RESPONDERS ************************************************************************** A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Sat 17 Jun 2017 Source: WHO EDCARN Secretariat [edited] WHO has launched a series of video courses on epidemics, pandemics and health emergencies. Geared for responders working in emergencies, the courses are also accessible to the public. The courses, which are on a platform called OpenWHO, transform complex scientific knowledge into easy-to-understand introductory video lessons, using a smaller bandwidth so that people in any country can access them. Offline versions are available on both Android and iOS devices. The platform can host an unlimited number of users and is free and open to anyone wishing to register. OpenWHO has 4 channels. One of the important channels is \"Outbreak,\" which focuses on diseases that are epidemic or pandemic-prone, such as Ebola, MERS, Zika, yellow fever, and pandemic influenza. Each course contains concrete knowledge and practical skills for our members and staff who are working in the field (e.g. infection prevention and control for viral hemorrhagic fever, ventilation management for severe acute respiratory infection). These courses will also be helpful to those who train medical workers in the field in epidemics and pandemics. In addition, this platform includes: - GetSocial!, which covers social science interventions such as risk communication, community engagement, and social mobilization. - Ready For Response, which offers courses on WHO's emergency response framework, Incident Management System and pre-deployment trainings for people who might be sent to countries for emergency response. - The Global Outbreak Alert and Response Network (GOARN), which provides them with the training necessary to participate in responses. All courses are in English, and many are also available in French and Arabic. To ensure that everyone involved in emergency response has the latest science and operational information, WHO makes some courses available in local languages and dialects during epidemics and emergencies. The video courses can be accessed here: OpenWHO: . The mobile phone apps can be downloaded here: - Android app: - iOS app: -- Communicated by: Nicola Petrosillo .................................................dk/msp/dk *##########################################################* ************************************************************ ProMED-mail makes every effort to verify the reports that are posted, but the accuracy and completeness of the information, and of any statements or opinions based thereon, are not guaranteed. The reader assumes all risks in using information posted or archived by ProMED-mail. ISID and its associated service providers shall not be held responsible for errors or omissions or held liable for any damages incurred as a result of use or reliance upon posted or archived material. ************************************************************ Donate to ProMED-mail. Details available at: ************************************************************ Visit ProMED-mail's web site at . Send all items for posting to: promed@promedmail.org (NOT to an individual moderator). If you do not give your full name name and affiliation, it may not be posted. You may unsub- scribe at . For assistance from a human being, send mail to:  . ############################################################ ############################################################ List-Unsubscribe: http://ww4.isid.org/promedmail/subscribe.php", "YELLOW FEVER - AMERICAS (48): BRAZIL ************************************ A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases [1] Date: 4-10 Jun 2017 [latest update: 9 Jun 2017] Source: ECDC Communicable Disease Threats Report [edited] Yellow fever is a mosquito-borne viral infection present in some tropical areas of Africa and South America. On 6 Jan 2017, Brazil reported an outbreak of yellow fever that started in December 2016 and is still ongoing. Bolivia, Colombia, Ecuador, Peru and Suriname have also reported cases of yellow fever in 2017. Between 18-31 May 2017, Brazil has reported 34 additional confirmed cases of yellow fever in the states of Esp\u00edrito Santo (24 [cases]), Minas Gerais (5), Rio de Janeiro (3), Distrito Federal (1) and Mato Grosso (1). These are the 1st confirmed cases of locally-acquired yellow fever in Distrito Federal and Mato Grosso since the beginning of the outbreak. -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail ****** [2] Date: Sat 17 Jun 2016 Source: Relief Web [edited] Brazil is experiencing its largest outbreak of yellow fever in decades; the outbreak is mainly occurring in the states of Minas Gerais and Espiritu Santo, which have the largest number of confirmed cases. However, the disease has spread to other regions in the country, affecting 407 municipalities. On 13 Jan 2017, the Ministry of Health declared a public health emergency in the state of Minas Gerais. According to the last epidemiological report from the Ministry of Health dated 31 May 2017, the distribution of cases and deaths have doubled and expanded since this Disaster Relief Emergency Fund (DREF) was published; this report further states that 3240 suspected cases of wild-type yellow fever were reported, of which 792 were confirmed (24.5 percent), 519 are still being studied (16 percent), and 1929 (59.5 percent) were ruled out, with a fatality rate of 34.5 percent. In total, 83.1 percent of the cases involved men between 16 and 65 years of age. -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts [Apparently, the yellow fever (YF) outbreak in Brazil is not over. The latest PAHO/WHO summary for Brazil issued on 24 May 2017 indicated that the last human cases occurred during week 16 (6-22 Apr 2017). The above report indicates that cases have occurred after that time. The reported cases are presumably human ones and not monkeys. Cases in non-human primates have been very widespread in Brazil this year (2017), having been reported in the Federal District and in the states of Alagoas, Amazonas, Bahia, Goi\u00e1s, Esp\u00edrito Santo, Mato Grosso, Mato Grosso do Sul, Minas Gerais, Par\u00e1, Para\u00edba, Paran\u00e1, Pernambuco, Rio Grande do Norte, Rio Grande do Sul, Rio de Janeiro, Rond\u00f4nia, Roraima, Santa Catarina, S\u00e3o Paulo, Sergipe, and Tocantins. (see Yellow fever - Americas (47): Brazil, PAHO/WHO Archive Number: http://promedmail.org/post/20170530.5071826). The above 34 recent, confirmed cases are probably spill-over from the sylvan (forest) cycle of transmission and not the urban, _Aedes aegypti_ transmitted cycle, or surely that would have been mentioned, and the alarm bells would have been sounded. Maps of Brazil can be accessed at  and  . A map showing the South American countries mentioned can be accessed at  . - Mod.TY A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  .] [", "MALARIA - VENEZUELA (02): (BOLIVAR) AUTOCHTHONOUS, EXTENSION OF THE NATIONAL EPIDEMIC ************************************************************************************* A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Thu 8 Jun 2017 Source: Correodelcaroni.com [in Spanish, trans. KS, edited] The malaria outbreak has killed 3 people in the rural region of Ciudad Guayana, Bolivar state. Malaria continues to advance in the Ciudad Guayana area at never before seen levels. While 2 years ago in Caroni there were just over 100 cases, the Guayana mayor said in a press release on 5 Jun 2017 that malaria currently \"affects more than 50 percent of the population of Guayana.\" The most affected parish of Ciudad Guayana is Pozo Verde. On Tuesday [6 Jun 2017], residents protested at the outpatient clinic to warn that 3 people have already died from the malaria epidemic due to the shortage of antimalarial drugs and drugs in general in this rural area, located on the road to El Pao. The protest began because today [8 Jun 2017], an elderly man died inside the outpatient clinic of Pozo Verde, \"and the family told us it was due to malaria. The problem with malaria there is serious,\" confirmed Antonio Agrim\u00f3n, a spokesman for Pozo Verde's Circle of Popular Struggle (CLP) number 3. The activist has followed the progress of malaria in the parish as he participates in neighborhood efforts to equip the Pozo Verde clinic with more supplies. \"I know that yesterday (7 Jun 2017) they received a large lot of drugs (anti malaria), but they were used up by this morning. The problem is widespread; many people are sick.\" The death of the elderly man this morning [8 Jun 2017] comes on top of the deaths of a young girl and an adult woman over the weekend, according to Joel Freites, another activist in the area. \"We are talking about 3 dead this week alone. We know that there are more so far this year [2017], but I do not have the names at hand,\" said the spokesman. Agrim\u00f3n added that some 700 malaria tests are processed daily in the Pozo Verde outpatient clinic \"and 90 percent of them are positive.\" This Tuesday [13 Jun 2017?] at 3:00 p.m. they expect to receive another batch of anti-malarial medicine, which must be taken daily for 15 continuous days. If a day is missed, the treatment loses effectiveness. According to the Epidemiological Bulletin of the Ministry of Health, malaria increased by 76.4 percent throughout the country between 2015 and 2016, for a total of 240 613 malaria sufferers in Venezuela. Of the total, 177 619 of the infected are located in the state of Bol\u00edvar. \"Malaria is a tragedy that is being lived in Pozo Verde. It has to do with people who are going to the mines to look for opportunities. There has been a problem for some time, but now a rebound has emerged like never before,\" Freites said. Malaria is a disease transmitted by the Anopheles mosquito, which typically reproduces in jungle ecosystems. The municipality of Sifontes, south of Bolivar, has always been the national leader in the number of malaria infections. By the end of 2016, they had reported 102 543 confirmed cases, according to the Epidemiological Bulletin of the Ministry of Health. The lack of public health systems has resulted in mine workers becoming infected with malaria then carrying the sickness to the municipality of Caron\u00ed, where the disease has rapidly spread. According to the Epidemiological Bulletin, the municipality of Caroni reported 8138 cases of malaria in 2016, a massive increase from 2015, when they only reported 922. The parish with the highest number of cases is Pozo Verde, which at the end of 2016 had 6412 malaria infections. The Ministry of Health has not updated the figures of the Epidemiological Bulletin for June 2017, but the residents of the sector confirm that \"every day there are more cases.\" Freites clarified that \"there are people who say that they have had malaria several times, but that is not so; it is the same parasite that has not been exterminated; they have not really recovered; ...that is because there is no medicine.\" The respondents said that at the Pozo Verde outpatient clinic, IV fluids and equipment necessary to help the dehydrated patients are scarce. \"There are people who are healthy and can resist the disease, but hypertensive, obese, diabetic, or pregnant people are at risk if they get malaria,\" said Freites, referring to risky -- potentially deadly -- cases. It is worth mentioning that a year ago, residents of Puerto Libre in the Cachamay parish also protested after the deaths of 3 people in the community suffering from malaria, and to demand the government fumigate in their sector. On 5 Jun 2017, the Social Development Department of the Caron\u00ed City Council donated 3 microscopes to carry out malaria tests for patients in Pozo Verde, 5 de Julio and Yocoima, the \"parishes with the highest number of people affected\" by malaria in Caron\u00ed, according to this institution. It was in this communication that the municipality revealed that more than 50 percent of the population of Ciudad Guayana is affected by malaria. Correo del Caron\u00ed has been able to confirm the rapid advance of the disease in the city between 2016 and 2017, including the parish Vista al Sol, a town that until 2 years ago had not reported any cases. \"We are going to make an extensive investigation of inhabitants of the municipality of Caron\u00ed with the purpose of attacking malaria from the root and thus proceed to the delivery of medicines and fumigation in each community of Ciudad Guayana,\" said the press release by the political secretary of the Mayor's Office, Roy Quiaragua. The official said that \"in the coming weeks\" the Social Patriotic Services Corporation will clean up stagnant water in rural parishes \"to strengthen the fight against malaria.\" The actions of the municipality do not include days of fumigation or distribution of mosquito nets with insecticides, measures that are essential to eradicate malaria according to the World Health Organization (WHO). Currently, malaria is a disease eradicated from the 1st world. Venezuela has been experiencing an unprecedented upswing in the last year, which shows the ineffectiveness of epidemiological control in the local and national public health system. -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail [ProMED has been reporting on the evolving return of malaria to Venezuela over the past few years. A recent map from the CDC (Atlanta) indicates that risk of malaria exists in the whole country, and all visitors are advised to take malaria prophylaxis ( ). - Mod.EP A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  .] [", "SEVERE FEVER WITH THROMBOCYTOPENIA SYNDROME - SOUTH KOREA (GANGWON-DO) ********************************************************************** A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Sun 18 Jun 2017 Source: The Korea Times [edited] The Gangwon provincial government said on Saturday [17 Jun 2017] that a woman in Inje County died from a tick-borne virus last week. The woman, 61, who tested positive for severe fever with thrombocytopenia syndrome (SFTS), died while receiving hospital treatment on Wednesday [14 Jun 2017]. This is the 1st death from SFTS in Gangwon province this year [2017]. The woman was among 2 people who tested positive for the virus in Gangwon, along with a person in Hwacheon County. The woman suffered symptoms such as a stomachache after working outdoors on her farm and removing and killing an insect on her dog on 11 Jun [2017]. A dead tick was found on her right arm as well as 2 sores which were suspected to be tick bites. The woman tested positive to SFTS on 12 Jun [2017]. This is the 3rd death from SFTS nationwide following 2 on Jeju Island. In April [2017], a 64-year-old woman on Jeju Island who engaged in bee keeping tested positive to SFTS and died while receiving hospital treatment. Another woman, 79, died in Jeju after testing positive to SFTS in March [2017]. The woman lost consciousness after collecting wild herbs outdoors. SFTS infections usually occur during the spring, summer, and autumn months when people engage in outdoor activities. A high fever, vomiting and diarrhea after outdoor activity are suspected symptoms of an SFTS infection. Disease control authorities advise wearing long-sleeved shirts and long pants, as well as wearing hats when engaging in activities in forests or on grass, and using mats when sitting on the ground. In addition, authorities advise taking a shower and brushing off one's clothing and putting it in the wash after outdoor activity. [Byline: Kim Bo-eun] -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts [SFTS virus is endemic in South Korea, and cases sporadically occur there. In a 21 Jun 2014 comment, Dr Oh Myeong-don, an infectious disease and internal medicine physician at Seoul National University Hospital said: \"The tick that carries the virus in question, _Haemaphysalis longicornis_, was discovered in South Korea around 30 years ago. A lot of research has been conducted into the issue in China. The reason the media were reporting that the mortality rate of the disease was 30 percent is that at 1st, they were only able to find the most serious cases. But now, reports have also been made of people who recovered on their own after being infected and people who only had mild symptoms, which has brought the mortality rate down to 6 per cent,\" Oh said. \"While there is no reason to be overly concerned about the disease, it is still a good idea to make sure you don't get bitten by ticks.\" (See ProMED archive Severe fever w/ thrombocytopenia synd. - South Korea (02): (HN) clarification http://promedmail.org/post/20140622.2558325). \"The SFTS virus is widespread in China in both the human population and domestic animals (especially goats) harboring ticks.\" SFTS virus is a phlebovirus in the Bunyavirus family. Characterization of the virus responsible for SFTS was described 1st by Yu XJ et al in a publication in the N Engl J Med. 2011 Apr 21;364(16):1523-32, entitled \"Fever with thrombocytopenia associated with a novel bunyavirus in China\" ( ). Images of a _Haemaphysalis longicornis_ tick can be seen at  . Maps of South Korea can be accessed at  and  . - Mod.TY] [", "CHOLERA, DIARRHEA AND DYSENTERY UPDATE (55): YEMEN ************************************************** A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases [1] Date: Sun 18 Jun 2017 Source: XinHuaNet [edited] The death toll from cholera in war-torn Yemen has increased to 1054 since 27 Apr 2017, with the total suspected cases reaching 151 000, the Yemeni health authorities said on Sat 17 Jun 2017 in a statement published by Saba news agency. Earlier in June 2017, the United Nations International Children's Emergency Fund (UNICEF) expected suspected cases could hit 130 000 in 2 weeks, while last month [May 2017], WHO expected they could reach 300 000 in the next 6 months. The outbreak has spread fast in 20 out of 22 Yemeni governorates in just 7 weeks, since 27 Apr 2017. Yemen is facing total collapse as the war continues. 2/3rds of the total population, around 19 million, need humanitarian and protection aid. About 10.3 million people are close to famine, and 14.5 million lack access to safe drinking water. Less than 45 percent of the country's hospitals are operational at the moment, but even the operational ones are coping with huge challenges, on top of which is a lack of medications, medical equipment and staffs. The blockade on Yemen, part of a Saudi-led bombing campaign launched in March 2015, has deepened the crisis in the country, which used to import most of its basic needs. -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail ****** [2] Date: Sat 17 Jun 2017 Source: Asharq Aawsat [edited] Yemeni authorities have accused insurgents of causing an increase in the number of cases of cholera infections in Taiz because of the siege in the city. They also held them responsible for blocking efforts to counter the spread of the disease in the provinces under the control of their militias. In a report issued Fri 16 Jun 2017 by the Ministry of Health in Yemen, the ministry said that its medical and epidemiological and preventive monitoring teams are facing huge difficulties to reach Sana'a, Hodeidah and Hajjah governorates where cases of illness were recently detected as a result of the control of the coup militias over these provinces. The report, published by SPA, pointed out the decline in the number of cholera cases in Dhamar, Dhale, Mahwit and Ibb governorates, noting that there are 11 provinces where cases have not been diagnosed accurately yet, whereas the number of cases has increased in Taiz, which suffers a suffocating siege by Houthi militias that hinders the work of medical teams and worsens the situation. -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail [The statistics of the impressive ongoing epidemic in Yemen in 2017 are: Date (2017) / Cases / Deaths 8 May / 1360 / 25 11 May / 2752 / 51 13 May / 8595 / 115 14 May / 11 000 / 180 17 May / 17 200 / 209 19 May / 23 500 / 242 21 May / 29 300 / 315 22 May / 35 217 / 361 24 May / 42 207 / 420 27 May / 51 832 / 471 30 May / 65 300 / 532 2 Jun / 73 700 / 605 4 Jun / 86 400 / 676 5 Jun / 91 400 / 728 6 Jun / 96 000 / 746 7 Jun / 101 820 / 789 10 Jun / 116 700 / 869 12 Jun / 124 002 / 923 14 Jun / 140 116 / 989 16 Jun / 151 000 / 1054  - Mod.LL A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  .] [", "LEPTOSPIROSIS - PHILIPPINES: (CORDILLERA ADMINISTRATIVE REGION) FLOODING ************************************************************************ A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Sat 17 Jun 2017 Source: Outbreak News Today [edited] One person has died from the bacterial infection leptospirosis. The Cordillera Administrative Region in northern Luzon, Philippines has seen a 40 percent rise in the disease during the 1st 6 months of 2017 compared to the same period last year [2016], according to the Department of Health, Cordillera Administrative Region (DOH-CAR). DOH records show that Baguio City and Kalinga province had the largest number of cases at 21.4%, followed by Benguet and Ifugao provinces (14.3%), and Apayao (7.1%). Flash floods in some regions have been linked to the increase. Geeny Austria, Nurse V of DOH-CAR, advised: \"Please keep out of flooded areas, and wear proper protective gear when going out during rainy season to avoid being infected with the disease.\" Leptospirosis, caused by a corkscrew-shaped bacterium called _Leptospira interrogans_, is often referred to as \"rat fever\" due to the principal role rats play in spreading the disease (scientists refer to this type of animal as a reservoir host). Other animals can also be important reservoirs of the disease. These animals can spread the disease in their urine, contaminating water, soil, or food. People who live in close contact with domestic animals or wildlife are at higher risk for getting the disease. People become infected by coming into contact with contaminated urine, water, food, or soil through breaks in the skin, eyes, mouth, or nose. Outbreaks of leptospirosis are usually caused by exposure to contaminated water, such as floodwaters. Person-to-person transmission is rare. Infected individuals initially experience fever, severe headache and muscle aches, abdominal pain, and occasionally a skin rash. Patients in the later stages of disease can suffer from jaundice, kidney failure, bleeding from the mouth or nose, and bloody urine, and the disease can be fatal, especially without proper treatment. -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts [Leptospirosis is an infection transmitted to humans by exposure to soil or fresh water contaminated with the urine of wild and domestic animals (including dogs, cattle, swine, and especially rodents) that are chronically infected with pathogenic _Leptospira_. The spirochete _Leptospira_ may survive in contaminated fresh water or moist soil for weeks to months. Outbreaks of leptospirosis frequently follow heavy rainfall, flooding with fresh water, and increasing rodent numbers. Cordillera Administrative Region (CAR) is a landlocked region on the island of Luzon with 6 provinces: Abra, Apayao, Benguet, Ifugao, Kalinga and Mountain Province. The regional center is Baguio City, located in Benguet province and 247 km (153 miles) north of Manila, the capital of the Philippines ( ). A map showing the provinces of CAR can be found at  . For a discussion of leptospirosis in Manila, see ProMED-mail posts Leptospirosis - Philippines: (Metro Manila) flooding http://promedmail.org/post/20130827.1905617, as well as Leptospirosis - Philippines (03) http://promedmail.org/post/20111018.3118. A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  . - Mod.ML A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  .] [", "CYST NEMATODE, POTATO - KENYA ***************************** A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Wed 14 Jun 2017 Source: Kenya News Agency [edited] Food security in Kenya is under threat from a potato disease that has been reported in 20 [out of a total of 47] counties. The Nakuru County Executive for Agriculture, Dr Stanley Chepkwony, said a potato cyst nematode has been reported. He said the disease has the capacity of wiping out potatoes in the country. He, however, said the authorities were on high alert and surveillance had been enhanced. It's suspected that some unscrupulous businessmen may have imported seed [tubers], but by-passed the certification process by Kenya Plant Health Inspection Service (KPHIS). He urged farmers to grow only KEPHIS certified potato seeds. [Byline: Veronica Bosibori] -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail [Both golden (_Globodera rostochiensis_, with at least 5 races) and pale (_G. pallida_) potato cyst nematodes (PCNs) cause serious crop losses in potato. Other solanaceous crops (such as tomato) and weeds may serve as pathogen reservoirs. PCN symptoms on potato include stunting, yellowing and wilting of leaves, as well as a reduced root system. PCNs may lead to complete crop failure. Diseased plants first occur in isolated patches and these become larger with each new crop. The nematodes can survive in soil for up to 20 years as cysts. Spread occurs via infected soil, water, wind or on plant material (such as seed potatoes). Disease management may include exclusion, long crop rotation with non-host species, use of crop cultivars resistant to specific PCN races (pathotypes) and nematicides. Control measures can be combined to keep nematode levels below economic thresholds. The report above does not state which of the 2 species has been detected. In Africa, both PCN species have been reported north of the Sahara, but _G. rostochiensis_ has previously also been reported from South Africa and Kenya, so this may be the species referred to above. Maps Kenya: and Kenya counties: Africa (overview): Pictures Photo galleries of pale PCN pathogen and symptoms:  and Photo gallery of golden PCN pathogen and symptoms: Links Information on _G. pallida_ (including taxonomy):  ,  , (with distribution map),  ,  , and Information on _G. rostochiensis_:  , (with distribution map) and  (incl. pathotypes) - Mod.DHA] [", "LATE BLIGHT, POTATO - BHUTAN: (CHHUKHA) *************************************** A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Sat 10 Jun 2017 Source: Kuensel Online [edited] Late blight [is] infesting potato tubers in [areas of] Chukha [District]. Farmers may not be able to harvest potato like last year [2016]. Potato is the main cash crop [and] almost all the households are affected. [A farmer] said, \"It started early in March [2017] and it is affecting the growth of the crop.\" He said the potato growers are worried. [An official] said the disease is spreading. Chukha agriculture officer Sonam said this is not the 1st time the disease infested potatoes in the locality. \"But it affected during harvest time in past years.\" He said 'late blight' has affected the tuber early this year [2017] and caused severe damages. \"Spraying fungicides is not an option for farmers.\" [He] said intermittent rainfall is a factor in spreading the disease. Meanwhile, the agriculture team and experts from the national potato programme has assessed the affected fields. \"We will discuss intervention and way forward once the report is finalised,\" Sonam said. [Byline: Rajesh Rai] -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail [Potato late blight (PLB) is caused by the fungus-like organism (oomycete) _Phytophthora infestans_ and can cause 100 per cent crop loss. The pathogen can also affect tomato and some other solanaceous crops. In potato, it affects leaves as well as tubers; in tomato, it causes lesions and rotting of leaves, stems and fruits. The disease is favoured by cool, moist conditions. It can spread rapidly within a crop and destroy it within a few days. Under favourable conditions, epidemics in tomatoes may be even more rapid than in potatoes. PLB is spread by plant material (including plant debris and volunteer crop plants), mechanical means (including human and insect activities), wind and water. Disease management requires an integrated approach and may include removal of pathogen reservoirs, crop rotation, preventive fungicide treatments of planting material and fungicide sprays of crops. Late blight is considered an increasing problem worldwide. More virulent strains with additional fungicide resistances and increased yield losses are emerging frequently. Farm saved or uncertified seed tubers have often been reported as sources of PLB outbreaks in the past. Thus, seed tuber certification schemes have been set up in many countries. Development of resistant cultivars is being counteracted by the adaptability of the pathogen. Clean planting stock (potato seed tubers; tomato seeds or explants) and management strategies for fungicide resistance of the pathogen are considered vital to control PLB in the future. Elsewhere in the region, current outbreaks of PLB are reported in Bangladesh (ProMED-mail posts http://promedmail.org/post/20170209.4825828 and http://promedmail.org/post/20170115.4767829). Maps Bhutan:  and Bhutan districts: Pictures Late blight on potato:  and PLB resistant vs. susceptible potato varieties: Late blight on tomato: Microscopy of PLB infected cells: Links Information on late blight:  ,  ,  , and PLB disease cycle: Late blight information and resources via:  and _P. infestans_ taxonomy: - Mod.DHA] [", "CIGUATERA FISH POISONING - EU: POSSIBLE LOCAL FISH SOURCE, REQUEST FOR INFORMATION ********************************************************************************** A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Fri 16 Jun 2017 Source: Science Daily, BfR Federal Institute for Risk Assessment report [edited] Increase in ciguatera fish poisoning cases in Europe ---------------------------------------------------- The substance ciguatoxin is only found in fish from tropical and subtropical seas. For some years now, cases of ciguatera have been reported with increasing frequency in Europe, in particular on the Spanish and Portuguese islands in the Atlantic but also in Germany. New information indicates that these toxins are increasingly prevalent in the Mediterranean. The global trade of imported fish is another reason for the increasing occurrence of ciguatoxin poisoning in Europe. \"Fish should be a regular part of the diet,\" says BfR-President Professor Dr Andreas Hensel. \"Ciguatera is a very rare form of fish poisoning in Germany. The reported cases have been caused by the consumption of contaminated tropical predatory fish such as various snapper species.\" These include _Lutjanus bohar_ (two-spot red snapper), _L. argentimaculatus_ [mangrove red snapper], _L. erythropterus_ (crimson snapper), or _Pinjalo pinjalo_. European scientists have combined their expertise in the EuroCigua project on the \"determination of the incidence and epidemiological characteristics of ciguatera cases in Europe.\" The aim is to characterize the risks of ciguatoxin poisoning in Europe. The EuroCigua project is developing reliable methods for the identification and quantification of ciguatoxin in fish and microalgae in European waters. Under the umbrella of the European Food Safety Authority (EFSA), 14 further European organisations from 6 member states are involved in the project, including the BfR. Ciguatoxin poisoning is triggered by metabolites of microalgae whose natural habitat is in the coral reefs of the Caribbean as well as the Pacific and Indian Oceans. Herbivorous fish feed on these microorganisms. If the small fish are eaten by larger predatory fish, the ciguatoxins can accumulate and subsequently find their way into the human food chain. The initial focus of the EuroCigua project is to determine the frequency of ciguatera cases and ciguatoxic fish in Europe. Alongside this, the involved parties are developing and establishing new, reliable methods to detect the presence of ciguatoxin in fish and microalgae. The detection of ciguatoxins is putting high demands on the analytical methods, as the toxins are effective in very low concentrations. Moreover, these toxins occur in many different chemical structures -- depending on the catch area. At the present time, no analytical methods are available for the routine testing of fish for ciguatoxins. While ciguatera cases used to be confined to tropical and subtropical regions of the world, Spain and Portugal have been reporting outbreaks of ciguatoxin poisoning on the Canary Islands and Madeira since 2008. In Germany as well, there has been at least one ciguatera outbreak with up to 20 affected people every year since 2012. By means of the EuroCigua project, the scientists hope to gain a better understanding of the time-based and geographic distribution in European waters of the _Gambierdiscus_ spp microorganism responsible for poisoning. They are also investigating whether fish from EU waters might contain ciguatoxin. One important part of the project is ciguatera prevention. The experts have created a leaflet outlining recommendations to reduce the risk of food poisoning in the affected regions. Fish should be a regular part of the diet, but the experts advise against eating the offal of tropical predatory fish, as they contain the highest ciguatoxin levels. Ciguatoxin is heat-stable and is therefore not destroyed during the preparation of fish. It is colorless, odorless, and tasteless and can therefore not be detected by the naked eye. Ciguatoxin poisoning is accompanied by a variety of clinical symptoms, including gastrointestinal and especially neurological disorders such as the reversal of cold-hot sensitivity. When the 1st symptoms appear, the affected persons should seek immediate medical attention and inform the competent veterinary authority. -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail [This posting appears to suggest that the increase in cases is due to locally acquired fish rather that fish imported from known endemic areas. ProMED would like more information in this regard. A recent open access review of ciguatera fish poisoning (CFP) has been published in Marine Drugs: Friedman MA , Fernandez M, Backer LC, et al: An updated review of Ciguatera Fish Poisoning: Clinical, epidemiological, environmental, and public health management. Mar Drugs 2017, 15(3): pii: E72; doi:10.3390/md15030072 ( ). The publication does not say that the intoxication occurs related to fish from European waters. The description of the acute illness with the citations intact (the citations can be found at the original URL) has been extracted below: \"CFP is characterized by gastrointestinal, neurological, and cardiovascular symptoms. In addition, after the initial or acute illness, neuropsychological symptoms may be reported. Clinical features can vary depending on elapsed time since eating the toxic meal, and whether the geographic source of the implicated \ufb01sh was the Caribbean Sea, Paci\ufb01c, or Indian Ocean [17,36,52-58]. Gastrointestinal symptoms and signs usually begin within 6-12 hours of \ufb01sh consumption and resolve spontaneously within 1-4 days. Gastrointestinal symptoms may include nausea, vomiting, abdominal pain, and diarrhea. The neurologic symptoms usually present within the 1st 2 days of illness. They often become prominent after the gastrointestinal symptoms (particularly in CFP events from Caribbean \ufb01sh), although they may present concurrently with gastrointestinal symptoms (K Schrank, written communication, April 2016) [59]. The neurologic symptoms vary among patients and include paresthesias (that is, numbness or tingling) in the hands and feet or oral region, metallic taste, sensation of loose teeth, generalized pruritus (itching), myalgia (muscle pain), arthralgia (joint pain), headache, and dizziness. A distinctive neurologic symptom is cold allodynia, sometimes referred to as \"hot-cold reversal,\" an alteration of temperature perception in which touching cold surfaces produces a burning sensation or a dysesthesia (that is, unpleasant, abnormal sensation) [60]. One study revealed that intra-cutaneous injection of CTX in humans elicited this sensation [61]. Cold allodynia is considered pathognomonic of CFP, although not all patients report experiencing it and it can be seen with other human seafood poisoning syndromes (such as neurotoxic shell\ufb01sh poisoning). Less commonly, severe central nervous system symptoms, such as coma or hallucinations, have been reported [54,62,63]. Neuropsychological symptoms, which often become apparent in the days or weeks after the initial or acute illness, include subjectively reported cognitive complaints such as confusion, reduced memory, and dif\ufb01culty concentrating [64-67], depression or irritability [64,65,68], and anxiety [65]. Fatigue or malaise have been reported and may be debilitating [6,62,69,70]. Cardiac symptoms and signs may manifest, generally in the early stage of the illness. When present, they usually occur in combination with gastrointestinal and/or neurologic signs and symptoms [71,72]. Cardiac signs often include hypotension and bradycardia which may necessitate emergency medical care.\" - Mod.LL A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  .] [", "HEPATITIS B AND C - USA: (NORTH CAROLINA) INJECTION DRUG USE ************************************************************ A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Fri 16 Jun 2017 12:00 pm EDT Source: Wilkes Journal-Patriot [edited] North Carolina is in the midst of a rapid rise in cases of hepatitis B and C, prompting state health officials to urge residents to get tested. According to the NC Department of Health and Human Services, new cases of hepatitis B were up by 56 percent between 2014 and 2016, and new cases of hepatitis C increased by 69 percent in the same period. Hepatitis C has been on the rise in the state since 2009. The spread is mostly resulting from exposure to infected blood when drug users share needles or other drug paraphernalia. There is a strong correlation between the opioid epidemic and the surge in new cases of hepatitis B and C. Prescription pain pills are often liquefied with heat and then injected with a needle. State health officials are encouraging North Carolinians to help stop the spread of hepatitis B and hepatitis C by not sharing needles or other injection equipment and by talking to their physician or local health department about getting tested. Hepatitis B, and less often hepatitis C, can also be spread through sex with an infected partner. Most hepatitis cases in North Carolina have been in white males ages 21 to 40, with western border counties like Wilkes impacted the most. Adults born between 1945 and 1965 are also more likely to have hepatitis C. Preliminary data shows 172 new cases of hepatitis B and 186 new cases of hepatitis C were reported in North Carolina in 2016. In 2014, there were 110 new cases each of type B and type C reported. The CDC estimates the actual number of infections is likely 7 times higher than the number of reported cases of hepatitis B and 14 times higher for hepatitis C. An estimated 110 000 to 150 000 North Carolinians have a chronic hepatitis C infection, and 25 000 to 66 000 have a chronic hepatitis B infection. Many people do not experience symptoms and are unaware they are infected. -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts [Hepatitis B can be prevented by a vaccine that has been available in the USA since 1982 and has been part of universal immunization in childhood for most of that time. It would be interesting to know the age range and immunization history of the acute HBV cases. Most cases of acute hepatitis C are not recognized or reported because they are asymptomatic or anicteric (without jaundice) so the case numbers are likely underreported. In the absence of a vaccine for hepatitis C (as are available for hepatitis A and B), infection avoidance techniques such as needle exchange programs and the need for aggressive available programs in counseling, not criminalizing, substance addiction are vitally needed. There is no evidence that government sponsored needle exchange programs increase the amount of substance abuse. - Mod.LL A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  .] [", "FOODBORNE ILLNESS - TURKEY: (MANISA) MILITARY BASE, REQUEST FOR INFORMATION *************************************************************************** A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Sun 18 Jun 2017 16:19 TRT Source: RT.com [edited] Over 700 soldiers have required medical aid since complaining of nausea and vomiting after a tainted meal at a military compound in the western Turkish province of Manisa, which already saw a mass food poisoning in May 2017 that left one soldier dead. The Manisa Prosecutor's Office said in a statement on [Sun 18 Jun 2017] that 731 soldiers have been affected. Defense Minister Fikri Isik and the commander of Turkish Land Forces, General Zeki Colak, visited the soldiers at the hospital, Daily Sabah reports. The defense minister said 372 soldiers have been hospitalized, while the others are being treated at the military facility. \"No one is in life threatening condition,\" Fikri Isik said, as cited by Anadolu news agency. The food poisoning caused nausea, vomiting, and diarrhea, according to the doctors, Hurriyet Daily News reported. Earlier in May 2017, more than 1000 soldiers were struck by salmonellosis infection that resulted in the death of one soldier. \"Upon the repeat incident, our office has launched a 2nd investigation. Blood and urine sample from the suffering soldiers, as well as samples from the chicken and food items, water, and all other ingredients served at the dinner, have been taken and sent for an expert examination,\" Simsek said, as quoted by Hurriyet. -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail [In the report above, nausea and vomiting are mentioned in one place and nausea, vomiting, and diarrhea in another as the symptoms of the large cluster of illness. The presence of diarrhea along with vomiting, especially if combined with fever, would make staphylococcal enterotoxin induced illness unlikely. Knowing the incubation period between the meal and the onset of symptoms would also be important as staphylococcal illness has a short incubation period, as little as 4-6 hours. ProMED would appreciate more information about the outbreak. - Mod.LL Maps of Turkey can be seen at  and  . - Sr.Tech.Ed.MJ] [", "MERS-COV (40): ANIMAL RESERVOIR, CAMELS, REVIEW, FAO **************************************************** A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Mon 19 Jun 2017 [accessed] Source: FAO fcc-empres information sheets, 6, Jun 2017 [summ., edited] Introduction ------------ Middle East Respiratory Syndrome Coronavirus (MERS-CoV) is an emerging threat for public health globally and can be a cause of severe respiratory infection in humans, especially those suffering other ailments. The disease is new to humans and was first reported in 2012 in Saudi Arabia. Dromedary camels are thought to be a natural reservoir of MERS-CoV and can be a source of infection for humans. Camels are widely spread throughout the world, mainly in arid areas, and serve important economic, livelihood, nutritional and social purposes. MERS-CoV is transmitted from person to person through close contact, especially in healthcare settings. However, there is currently no evidence of sustained person-to-person spread. Additionally, no vaccine or specific treatment is currently available to prevent MERS-CoV transmission. To date, 27 countries have reported human cases of MERS-CoV in the Middle East, Africa, Europe, Asia and North America. Nevertheless, the majority of cases have so far occurred in Saudi Arabia where according to some studies - MERS-CoV has been circulating in camels since at least 1992. All cases and outbreaks outside of this region can be traced back to someone who travelled from the Middle East. Dromedary Camels and MERS-CoV: filling knowledge gaps ----------------------------------------------------- It is thought that MERS-CoV originally evolved from a bat coronavirus and jumped to dromedary camels some time ago. Dromedaries are considered the natural host for MERS-CoV, although it has also been found in alpacas living in close proximity to infected camels. The challenges of MERS CoV at the human-animal interface can only be met using a One Health approach involving multi-sectoral collaboration, communication and cooperation. FAO plays a coordinating role to reduce the risk of MERS-CoV at the human-animal interface by working with global partners such as the World Organization for Animal Health (OIE) and the World Health Organization (WHO). The 3 organizations convene joint technical and expert meetings to advance knowledge and guide policy. FAO monitors regularly the MERS-CoV situation in humans and animals, issues monthly updates, publishes qualitative risk assessments, provides access to information and knowledge, and promotes research development with relevant institutions to address knowledge gaps in the transmission of MERS-CoV in animals and from animals to humans. Furthermore, FAO assists countries in developing communication strategies to ensure appropriate information reaches the public on MERS-CoV and avoid possible negative impacts on the livestock industry. FAO is currently implementing several projects on MERS -CoV in Africa and Middle East. Cross-sectional and longitudinal surveillance studies are being conducted in 4 countries - Egypt, Ethiopia, Jordan, and Kenya - at different nodes along the camel value chain including breeding herds, live camel markets, quarantine stations, and slaughterhouses. Camel value chain analyses are also being carried out to characterize the sector. Approximately 75 laboratory staff in 3 national veterinary laboratories have been trained on MERS-CoV diagnostic testing while 50 field personnel received training in sample collection and transportation, clinical examinations and data collection. In implementing the MERS-CoV projects, FAO works closely with funding partners (e.g. U.S. Agency for International Development - USAID), national governments, academic institutions, collaborating centers, and producer associations. More studies are planned to better understand routes of transmission to humans, seasonality factors, and potential animal host species, including wildlife. In addition, the collation of data that captures the distribution of virus circulation in countries with high camel population densities can offer opportunities to understand human 'spillover' events. Information from these studies would be important also for identification and evaluation of socioeconomic factors that are associated with risk of MERS-CoV infection in camel populations. -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail [OIE's Case definition for the reporting of MERS-CoV in camels (as an emerging disease), has been updated in May 2017 (available at  ). According to the updated text, a dromedary camel may be laboratory confirmed as a positive case by virus isolation or detection of viral nucleic acid. The presence of viral nucleic acid can be confirmed by: - a positive RT-PCR result on at least 2 specific genomic targets; - a single positive target with sequencing of a second target; or - a single positive target with positive result in a rapid MERS CoV antigen test. During its meeting of 7-10 Feb 2017, OIE's Biological Standards Commission noted that there was no chapter on MERS CoV in the Terrestrial Manual. As such a chapter would help OIE member countries in the laboratory confirmation of positive cases; the Commission recommended that the OIE ad hoc Group on MERS CoV develop a chapter in consultation with other MERS CoV experts. - Mod.AS A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  .] [", "CAMPYLOBACTERIOSIS - MEXICO: (SONORA) GUILLAIN-BARRE SYNDROME ************************************************************* A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases [1] Date: Fri 16 Jun 2017 Source: Canal 44, Mexico [in Spanish, machine trans., edited] A total of 7 people were affected in San Luis Rio Colorado, Sonora, by the bacterium _Campylobacter jejuni_, which caused a severe acute facial paralysis. One of those affected by the bacterium died. The secretary of Health of Sonora, Gilberto Ugson Beltran, confirmed this information, according to . The state official indicated that the patients contracted the bacterium from water consumption [see comment below - Mod.JH], but did not clarify whether the infection was from consumption of drinking or purified water. He clarified that the outbreak is controlled and in the past 21 days no new cases have occurred. He added that 6 years ago there had already been an outbreak of the bacteria in the area of the USA adjacent to the municipality of San Luis Rio Colorado and Baja California. Every year, _Campylobacter jejuni_ affects millions of people around the world. In addition, the microorganism can cause autoimmune diseases, such as inflammatory bowel disease or Reiter's arthritis. -- Communicated by: ProMED-ESP ****** [2] Date: Sat 17 Jun 2017 Source: Diario Noticias [in Spanish, machine trans., edited] The City Council of San Luis, through the Municipal Public Health Department, has warned of an outbreak of the Guillain-Barre syndrome [GBS], of which 6 cases have already been registered, with 1 death, between April and May 2017. In turn, the municipal administration rejected that the drinking water of the city is the cause of the disease, as published by a state media outlet. Mayor Enrique Reina Lizarraga stated that according to studies carried out by the State Public Health Laboratory, at the request of the Municipal Health Committee, the possibility that water has caused the problem was discarded. -- Communicated by: ProMED-ESP [In the 1995 paper by Rees, et al (1), _C. jejuni_ was found to be associated with GBS as recent campylobacteriosis was found in 26 percent of patients with GBS as compared to 1 per cent of matched controls. Of note, the GBS cases associated with _C. jejuni_ were significantly associated with the poorer outcome of slow recovery and residual disability. Although no specific serotype of _C. jejuni_ was linked to GBS in the study above, a subsequent paper (2) found that serotype O:19 strains were overrepresented in USA and Germany cases of GBS and these strains were likely to be serum-resistant. Subsequently, it has been found that the pathophysiology of the association was an example of antigenic mimicry (3). That is, the lipooligosaccharide of certain _C. jejuni_ strains cross reacted with human GM1 ganglioside and, in rabbits, anti-GM1 antibody was elicited following _C. jejuni_ lipooligosaccharide and limb weakness developed. Additionally, Bax, et al (4) reported that differences in sialic acid linkage of the bacterial saccharide produced different modulations of the immune response which could explain why some organisms may be linked to GBS and others not. References ---------- 1. Rees JH, Soudain SE, Gregson NA and Hughes RAC: _Campylobacter jejuni_ infection and Guillain-Barr\u00e9 syndrome. N Engl J Med 1995; 333(21): 1374-1349. Available at  . 2. Allos BN, Lippy FT, Carlsen A, Washburn RG and Blaser MJ: _Campylobacter jejuni_ strains from patients with Guillain-Barr\u00e9 syndrome. Emerg Infect Dis 1998; 4(2): 263-268. Available at  . 3. Yuki N, Susuki K, Koga M, et al: Carbohydrate mimicry between human ganglioside GM1 and _Campylobacter jejuni_ lipooligosaccharide causes Guillain-Barr\u00e9 syndrome. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2004; 101(31): 11404-11409. Available at  . 4. Bax M, Kuijf ML, Heikema AP, et al: _Campylobacter jejuni_ lipooligosaccharides modulate dendritic cell-mediated T cell polarization in a sialic acid linkage-dependent manner. Infect Immun 2011; 79(7): 2681-2689. Abstract available at  . - Mod.LL] [According to the article at (in Spanish) the 6 water samples analyzed by the Baja California State Health Secretariat were negative for _Campylobacter_, confirming that the drinking water is not the source of the outbreak. The Municipal Health Director suggests that it is common for chicken to be contaminated by the bacterium and therefore it is more likely that this was the source. This seems more probable given that the prevalence for the organism in susceptible avian species ranges from 0 to 100 percent, with higher rates observed in the summer. - Sr.Tech.Ed.MJ/Mod.JH Maps of Mexico can be seen at and . - Sr.Tech.Ed.MJ A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  .] [", "FOODBORNE ILLNESS - IRAQ (03): (NINEVEH) INTERNALLY DISPLACED PERSONS CAMP, NOT FATAL ************************************************************************************* A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Mon 19 Jun 2017 Source: Kurdistan24 [edited] The period between when the food was cooked and then transported to the IDP camps resulted in the food poisoning of over 825 displaced persons from Mosul in southwestern Erbil. On [Mon 12 Jun 2017], a group of volunteers prepared the food in Erbil and then transferred it to the camp in the afternoon as part of a charitable initiative. Hundreds of Internally Displaced Persons (IDPs) in the Hassan Sham and U2 camp got food poisoning after consuming the meals. They were immediately transferred to hospitals in Erbil and received necessary treatment. \"After we carried out an investigation of the case, we found out the cause of the food poisoning was due to the long period between preparing and consuming the food as it was packed in plastic containers and transferred to the camps,\" Erbil Governor Nawzad Hadi said on [Mon 19 Jun 2017], in a press conference. \"There were no deliberate intentions to poison IDPs by those who cooked the food,\" he added. \"The food itself was okay, but the delay between the preparation of the meals and their distribution, along with the improper storing of the food, was the reason hundreds of IDPs became ill,\" Hadi emphasized, stating the case had been sent to court. The Governor previously mentioned the food was cooked at 9:00 a.m. then transferred to the camp at 1:00 p.m. The food was later distributed between 4:00 and 5:00 p.m. Hadi noted the food should be prepared at the camps and that premade meals are forbidden. He thanked the Peshmerga and security members for quickly transporting 638 IDPs to hospitals in Erbil to receive prompt medical treatment, while the remaining were treated at the camps. The Erbil Health Department's Director-General Saman Hussein Barzinjy told Kurdistan24 the group which delivered the donation did not take into consideration health hazards related to food preparation and distribution. At the time, Barzinjy mentioned 1 of the camp's inhabitants had died from food poisoning. However, a statement released later apologized for the misinformation, assuring no one had died, adding the condition of the child who was thought dead was \"stable\". The Kurdistan Region is home to almost 2 million IDPs and refugees who fled from the threat of the Islamic State in Iraq and Syria. [Byline: Mewan Dolamari and Karzan Sulaivany] -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail [The issue seems clearly to be related to lack of refrigeration but the etiology remains unstated and may well be staphylococcal enterotoxin. - Mod.LL] [Food must never be left in the temperature danger zone from 40F (4C) to 140F (60C) for extended periods of time. Hot food needs to be cooled to 40F (4C) within 2 hours or kept above 140F (60C). Cold food should be maintained below 40F (4C). Failure to follow the guidelines for hot or cold foods can lead to food poisoning. -Mod.JH A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  .] [", "AVIAN INFLUENZA (115): BELGIUM (WEST FALNDERS) POULTRY, HPAI H5N8, OIE ********************************************************************** A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Mon 19 Jun 2017 Source: OIE, WAHID (World Animal Health Information Database), weekly disease information 2017; 30(25) [edited] Highly pathogenic avian influenza, Belgium ------------------------------------------ Information received on [and dated] 19 Jun 2017 from Dr Jean-Fran\u00e7ois Heymans, director, Animal Health and Safety of Products of Animal Origin, Federal Agency for the Safety of the Food Chain (FASFC), Bruxelles, Belgium Summary Report type: immediate notification Date of start of the event: 10 Jun 2017 Date of confirmation of the event: 16 Jun 2017 Reason for notification: reoccurrence of a listed disease Date of previous occurrence: 28 Mar 2017 Manifestation of disease: clinical disease Causal agent: highly pathogenic avian influenza virus Serotype: H5N8 Nature of diagnosis: laboratory (advanced), necropsy This event pertains to a defined zone within the country. New outbreaks (1) Summary of outbreaks Total outbreaks: 1 Outbreak 1: Waardamme, West-Vlaanderen, West Flanders Date of start of the outbreak: 10 Jun 2017 Outbreak status: resolved (19 Jun 2017) Epidemiological unit: other Total animals affected Species / Susceptible / Cases / Deaths / Killed and disposed of / Slaughtered: Birds / 4047 / 1650 / 500 / 3547 / 0 Affected population: Trader of birds intended for hobbyists Outbreak statistics [rates apparent, expressed as percentages] Species / Morbidity rate / Mortality rate / Case fatality rate / Proportion susceptible animals lost* Birds / 40.77 / 12.35 / 30.30 / 100 *Removed from the susceptible population through death, destruction, and/or slaughter Epidemiology Source of the outbreak(s) or origin of infection: introduction of new live animals, fomites (humans, vehicles, feed, etc) Control measures Measures applied: surveillance outside containment and/or protection zone, surveillance within containment and/or protection zone, traceability, official destruction of animal products, official disposal of carcasses, by-products and waste, stamping out, zoning, vaccination prohibited, no treatment of affected animals Measures to be applied: disinfection Diagnostic test results Laboratory name and type / Species / Test / Test date / Result CERVA (National laboratory) / Birds / nucleotide sequencing / 16 Jun 2017 / Positive CERVA (National laboratory) / Birds / real-time reverse transcriptase/polymerase chain reaction (RRT-PCR) / 14 Jun 2017 / Positive CERVA (National laboratory) / Birds / virus isolation / 16 Jun 2017 / Positive Future reporting The event is continuing. Weekly follow-up reports will be submitted. [The location of the outbreak can be seen on the interactive map included in the OIE report at the source URL above.] -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail [Between [22 May and 19 Jun 2017], 5 outbreaks of HPAI (subtype H5N8) have been identified in Belgium's captive bird population. See summary report and updated map of the event reported on 22 May 2017 at According to the information published by the Federal Agency for the Safety of the Food Chain (FASFC) found at  (last update 16 Jun 2017): \"A few cases of Highly Pathogenic Avian Influenza [HPAI], type H5N8, were detected in Belgium in February and March 2017 in wild birds and in hobbyist holdings of captive birds. \"HPAI H5N8 has been isolated again in June [2017] in Belgian amateur holdings of captive birds and moreover on [15 Jun 2017] in the facility of a bird dealer of different species, identified as the epidemiological link with the last hobbyists cases, and located in Oostkamp (West Flanders). \"The bird merchant of Oostkamp is only dealing with amateur, non-professional, owners (hobbyists). \"A Restriction zone [RZ] of 3 km [approx. 1.86 mi] has been determined around the infected hobby holdings. Euthanasia and destruction of the remaining birds and their products will be performed, and samples taken and sent to the official laboratory (CODA-CERVA). \"Furthermore, a Protection Zone (PZ) of 3 km [approx. 1.86 mi] and a Surveillance Zone [SZ] of 10 km [approx. 6.2 mi] has been determined around the holding of the bird merchant of Oostkamp. The SZ includes the localities of Oostkamp and Zedelgem and parts of the villages of Beernem, Brugge, Ichtegem, Jabbeke, Lichtervelde, Pittem, Torhout and Wingene. \"The maps are available on the following page  . \"Inside the RZ, PZ and SZ, the following measures have been put in force: - Confinement of all birds within the PZ around Oostkamp (the merchant outbreak); - Prohibition of movements of poultry, captive birds and eggs; - Prohibition to give feed and water to all birds (including captive birds) outside the building; - Inventory of all birds kept inside the restriction zone and communication of the inventories to the mayors of the towns within 72 hours. \"On a national level, the following measures starting on [15 Jun 2017], are still in force: - Prohibition of poultry and captive bird markets; - Prohibition of poultry gathering events (fairs, ...).\" Oostkamp is a municipality located in the Belgian province of West Flanders. The municipality comprises the villages of Hertsberge, Oostkamp proper, Ruddervoorde and Waardamme  . - Mod.CRD A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  .] [", "OBITUARY: MARTIN S. WOLFE ************************* A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Sun 18 Jun 2017 Source: Washington Post [edited] Martin S. Wolfe, 1935-2017 --------------------- Martin S. Wolfe, a tropical disease specialist who founded one of the country's 1st medical practices devoted to ailments incurred in travel, and who, in the 1970s, accompanied Henry Kissinger as his personal physician, died on 15 Jun 2017 at his home on Block Island, R.I. He was 82. The cause was a failure of his artificial heart pump, said his son, David Wolfe. Dr. Wolfe developed an interest in tropical diseases as a medical student, and, early in his career, spent 5 years doing field research in Ghana and Pakistan. As a staff medical officer for the State Department, he traveled the world with then-Secretary of State Henry Kissinger. He also served as a tropical medicine expert for the World Bank. In 1980, Dr. Wolfe opened Traveler's Medical Service, believed to be the 1st medical office of its kind in Washington, DC. He also had an affiliated parasitology laboratory and a private practice. Dr. Wolfe advised people making overseas trips about potential health risks and administered immunizations. If travelers returned with mysterious ailments, he often had to become a medical detective. He determined a diagnosis by retracing a patient's journeys to pinpoint where exposure to various maladies might have occurred. Dr. Wolfe often consulted with the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention about infectious diseases found in other parts of the world but rarely seen in the United States, such as malaria, cholera and yellow fever. He wrote more than 100 academic papers and textbook chapters about tropical medicine and travel medicine, which has become a recognized medical specialty. Through his research and his work with diplomats and other international travelers, Dr. Wolfe became an authority on such exotic conditions as giardiasis and schistosomiasis, both of which are caused by parasites. The ailments, often linked to exposure to contaminated water, can lead to severe physical problems if left untreated. Perhaps the most commonplace complaint of travelers returning to the United States was that they had developed diarrhea. Dr. Wolfe recommended that people travel with a supply of Pepto-Bismol or Imodium. \"The question we always ask in tropical medicine,\" he told The Washington Post in 2008, \"is where have you been and what have you been doing?\" Martin Samuel Wolfe was born on 9 Apr 1935 in Scranton, PA. His father was a tavern owner. He was an Eagle Scout and captain of his high school basketball team before entering Cornell University, where he received a bachelor's degree in 1957 and a medical degree in 1961. One of his medical school professors encouraged his interest in tropical medicine, and Dr. Wolfe did research in Ghana from 1962 to 1964. After a residency in New York, he trained at the London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine. Dr. Wolfe conducted additional medical research in Pakistan from 1967 to 1970, when he joined the State Department. He taught courses in tropical medicine and parasitology at the Georgetown and George Washington University medical schools and was a consultant for many years to the State Department, Peace Corps and World Bank. Dr. Wolfe was a member of the International Society of Travel Medicine and the American Society of Tropical Medicine and Hygiene, which presented him with its top award. He was a member of the Cosmos Club and Adas Israel Congregation. Dr. Wolfe retired in 2015. The Traveler's Medical Service in Washington is operated by his son, a physician; its New York branch is run by a daughter, a registered nurse and public health specialist. [Byline: Matt Schudel] -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail .................................................jh/msp/jh *##########################################################* ************************************************************ ProMED-mail makes every effort to verify the reports that are posted, but the accuracy and completeness of the information, and of any statements or opinions based thereon, are not guaranteed. The reader assumes all risks in using information posted or archived by ProMED-mail. ISID and its associated service providers shall not be held responsible for errors or omissions or held liable for any damages incurred as a result of use or reliance upon posted or archived material. ************************************************************ Donate to ProMED-mail. Details available at: ************************************************************ Visit ProMED-mail's web site at . Send all items for posting to: promed@promedmail.org (NOT to an individual moderator). If you do not give your full name name and affiliation, it may not be posted. You may unsub- scribe at . For assistance from a human being, send mail to:  . ############################################################ ############################################################ List-Unsubscribe: http://ww4.isid.org/promedmail/subscribe.php", "ANTHRAX - ROMANIA (03): (BOTOSANI) HUMAN, BOVINE, OIE ***************************************************** A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Mon 19 Jun 2017 Source: OIE, WAHID (World Animal Health Information Database), weekly disease information 2017; 30(25) [edited] Anthrax - Romania ----------------- Information received on [and dated] 19 Jun 2017 from Dr. Marius Grigore, Director, Head of Unit Animal Health Department General Sanitary Veterinary Directorate, National Sanitary Veterinary and Food Safety Authority, Bucharest, Romania Summary Report type: Immediate notification Date of start of the event: 2 Jun 2017 Date of confirmation of the event: 16 Jun 2017 Reason for notification: Recurrence of a listed disease Date of previous occurrence: 23 Aug 2016 Manifestation of disease: clinical disease Causal agent: _Bacillus anthracis_ Nature of diagnosis: Laboratory (advanced) This event pertains to a defined zone within the country New outbreaks (1) Summary of outbreaks: Total outbreaks: 1Outbreak 1: Flondora, Manoleasa, Botosani Date of start of the outbreak: 2 Jun 2017 Outbreak status: continuing (or date resolved not provided) Epidemiological unit: backyard Affected animals Species / Susceptible / Cases / Deaths / Killed and disposed of / Slaughtered Cattle / 24 / 1 / 0 / 0 / 1 Outbreak statistics [rates apparent, expressed as percentages] Species / Morbidity rate / Mortality rate / Case fatality rate / Proportion susceptible animals lost* Cattle / 4.17 / 0 / 0 / 4.17 *Removed from the susceptible population through death, destruction and/or slaughter Epidemiology Source of the outbreak(s) or origin of infection: unknown or inconclusive Epidemiological comments: A diseased bovine was slaughtered at home and meat kept in a freezer. The owner was infected with _Bacillus anthracis_. The diagnosis was confirmed on infected meat. Control measures: Measures applied: vaccination in response to the outbreak (s); screening; official disposal of carcasses, by-products and waste; disinfection; slaughter; no treatment of affected animals Measures to be applied: no other measures Diagnostic test results: Laboratory name and type / Species / Test / Test date / Result LSVJ, Botosani (Local laboratory) / Cattle / bacteriological examination / 16 Jun 2017 / Positive Future Reporting: The event is continuing. Weekly follow-up reports will be submitted. [The location of the outbreak can be seen on the interactive map included in the OIE report at the source URL above. This farm is on the NE corner of Romania bordering Moldova.] -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts [The cow was not yet dead when slaughtered and butchered. Not an unusual circumstance unfortunately with anthrax. While this report confirms that the owner was affected it fails to mention the 16 year old teenager is also reported to be ill and hospitalised. - Mod.MHJ A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  .] [", "CRIMEAN-CONGO HEMORRHAGIC FEVER - IRAN (03): UPDATE *************************************************** A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Sun 18 Jun 2017 Source: Financial Tribune (Iran) [edited] The spread of the Crimean-Congo hemorrhagic fever [CCHF] in Iran has caused serious concern among Iranians, as many refrain from buying red meat. \"After the spread of the disease, people refuse to buy red meat, which has led to a slump in sheepmeat sales,\" chairman of Sheepmeat Union, Ali Asghar Maleki, was quoted as saying by Mehr News Agency. Following the decline in demand, sheepmeat prices have fallen by 20 000 rials (USD 0.5) per kilogram, he added. Maleki warned of more disruption in the market, if the trend continues. CCHF is a widespread tick-borne viral disease that is now endemic in Africa, the Balkans, the Middle East, and Asia. Symptoms include fever, muscle pain, dizziness, neck pain and stiffness, backache, headache, sore eyes, and photophobia. It is a zoonotic disease carried by several domestic and wild animals. While clinical disease is rare in infected animals, it is severe in infected humans, with a mortality rate of 10-40 percent. Outbreaks of illness are usually attributed to _Hyalomma_ tick bites and contact with infected animals or people. So far, 38 cases of infection with the disease have been confirmed in Iran, 3 of whom have lost their lives. The head of Tehran Organ Meat Sellers Union told [Iranian Labour News Agency] that the spread of the disease and talks surrounding it have caused many problems for the members of this union with sales having slumped badly. \"Despite the Health Minister's announcement that the disease is under control, people still refuse to buy or consume (sheep or cow) liver,\" Gholamhossein Shirazi said. Organ meat, such as sheep or cow liver, heart and kidney, is a popular food in Iran. Noting that people's fear about consuming liver in authorized member unions is unfounded, he said all raw materials are provided from authorized slaughterhouses in the suburbs of Tehran, which operate under the supervision of Iran's Veterinarian Organization. \"With 15 big industrial slaughterhouses in the capital city, there is no need for contraband meat,\" he added. Shirazi stressed the role of media in dispelling rumors and said, \"It's the duty of mass media to report the officials' announcements to put people's mind at ease.\" Health Minister Hassan Qazizadeh Hashemi on [11 Jun 2017] announced that Congo fever in Iran is fully under control. However, he advised consumers to buy meat from authorized centers only. In addition, Mohammad Mehdi Gouya, the head of the Infectious Diseases Office at the Health Ministry, has urged people to check the Iranian Veterinary Organization's seal of approval on meat products before making purchases and to keep them refrigerated for 24 hours before consumption. People working in slaughterhouses are advised to use masks, gloves, and boots, as a precautionary measure, IRNA reported. -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail [Maps of Iran can be seen at  and  . Recently, the incidence of CCHF has increased rapidly in the countries of the World Health Organization Eastern Mediterranean Region (WHO EMRO), with sporadic human cases and outbreaks being reported from a number of countries in the region. However, very little reliable and accurate data are currently available on the burden of the disease in the region, as different surveillance systems for CCHF are used in many countries. Most countries do not have a definitive preventive and control strategy for CCHF as many aspects of the disease, such as the maintenance and transmission of the virus and the pathogenesis of the disease in humans, remain poorly understood. Since 1999, CCHF has been reported in 26 of the 31 provinces of Iran, with the greatest numbers of cases in Sistan and Baluchestan, Isfahan, Fars, Tehran, Khorasan, and Khuzestan. After the establishment of a comprehensive CCHF surveillance programme for humans and animals in Iran, a total of 3817 suspected human infections were reported between 2000 and 2015, of these 1068 were laboratory-confirmed with a case fatality rate was 14 percent. Sistan and Baluchestan province, which borders Afghanistan and Pakistan, have reported the highest infection rate in the country [2]. The detection of IgG in livestock indicated that that 35.8 percent of over 5000 sera were positive for CCHFV IgG. Therefore, the disease and its transmission elements are endemic to the country and the contribution of cross-border movements of people and cattle would be only a fraction as compared to the prevalent risk factors. It is important that continued efforts be made to improve the understanding of practices that may promote disease transmission and appropriate preventive and control measures recommended for the high risk groups. References ---------- 1. Papa A, Weber F, Hewson R, et al. Meeting report: First International Conference on Crimean-Congo Hemorrhagic Fever. Antiviral Res 2015; 120: 57-65. doi: 10.1016/j.antiviral.2015.05.005; abstract available at . 2. Mostafavi E, Haghdoost A, Khakifirouz S, Chinikar S. Spatial analysis of Crimean Congo hemorrhagic fever in Iran. Am J Trop Med Hyg 2013; 89(6): 1135-41. doi: 10.4269/ajtmh.12-0509; available at - Mod.UBA] [", "MERS-COV (41): SAUDI ARABIA (RIYADH, ASH SHARQIYAH) *************************************************** A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Thu 15 Jun 2017 Source: Saudi MOH 16-18 Jun 2017 [edited] As of 21:00 [9:00 PM GMT-4] today [Mon 19 Jun 2017], there have been a total of: 1667 laboratory-confirmed cases of MERS-CoV infection, including 673 deaths [reported case fatality rate 40.4 percent], 954 recoveries, and 40 currently active cases/infections. [these figures cover the period 16-18 Jun 2017. Information on 19 Jun 2017 still pending. - Mod.MPP] [As previously mentioned, the numbers of deaths, recoveries and currently active cases come from my spreadsheet tallies and differ from those listed on the Saudi MOH website; my spreadsheet counts asymptomatic infections. - Mod.MPP] Since the last ProMED-mail update [Thu 15 Jun 2017], there have been a total of: 4 newly confirmed cases/infections 3 newly reported fatalities, and 10 newly reported recoveries. Information on newly confirmed cases (4 cases) Date: Sun 18 Jun 2017 (2 cases) 1 - A 71-year-old Saudi male, non-healthcare worker from Hufoof [Ash Sharqiyah region] currently in critical condition. Classified as a primary case with high risk exposure history in the 14 days preceding onset of illness still under investigation. 2 - A 22-year-old Saudi male, non-healthcare worker from Riyadh [Riyadh region], currently in stable condition. Classified as a primary case with high risk exposure history in the 14 days preceding onset of illness still under investigation. Date: Sat 17 Jun 2017 (1 case) 3 - A 41-year-old expat female, healthcare worker from Riyadh [Riyadh region], currently in stable condition, having been identified as an asymptomatic contact of a confirmed MERS-CoV infected individual. Classified as a secondary healthcare acquired case in a healthcare worker. Date: Fri 16 Jun 2017 (1 case) 4 - A 68-year-old expat male, non-healthcare worker, from Riyadh [Riyadh region] noted to have died at the time of initial confirmation report. Classified as a secondary healthcare acquired case in a patient. [see fatality no. 3 below]. Information on newly confirmed fatalities (3 fatalities) Date: Sat 17 Jun 2017 (2 fatalities) 1- A 29-year-old Saudi male, non-healthcare worker from Riyadh [Riyadh region], with a history of pre-existing co-morbidities. [Reported as a newly confirmed case on 15 Jun 2017 at which time he was noted to be in critical condition. Classified as a secondary healthcare acquired case in a patient. - Mod.MPP] 2- A 45-year-old expat male from Hufoof [Ash Sharqiyah region], with no history of co-morbidities. [Reported as a newly confirmed case on 6 Jun 2017 at which time he was noted to be in stable condition. Classified as a primary case with a history of direct contact with camels in the 14 days preceding onset of illness. - Mod.MPP] Date: Fri 16 Jun 2017 (1 case) 3- A 68-year-old expat male, non-healthcare worker from Riyadh [Riyadh region] with a history of pre-existing co-morbidities. [Reported as a newly confirmed case on 16 Jun 2017 (see case no. 4 above), at which time he had been reported to have died. Classified as a secondary healthcare acquired case in a patient. - Mod.MPP] Information on newly confirmed recoveries (10 recoveries) Date: Sun 18 Jun 2017 (2 recoveries) - both from Riyadh - both Saudi nationals - both healthcare workers - both asymptomatic contacts of previously confirmed cases - both classified as secondary healthcare acquired cases in healthcare workers 1- A 27-year old male, with no co-morbidities. [Reported as a newly confirmed case/infection on 4 Jun 2017. - Mod.MPP] 2- A 48-year old male, with no co-morbidities. [Reported as a newly confirmed case/infection on 6 Jun 2017. - Mod.MPP] Date: Sat 17 Jun 2017 (7 recoveries) - all from Riyadh - all secondary cases 3- A 66-year old Saudi female, non-healthcare worker with a history of pre-existing co-morbidities. [Reported as a newly confirmed case/infection on 5 Jun 2017 at which time she was noted to be in stable condition, having been identified as an asymptomatic contact of a confirmed MERS-CoV infected individual. Classified as a secondary case in a household contact. - Mod.MPP] 4- A 32-year-old expat female, healthcare worker with no co-morbidities. [Reported as a newly confirmed case/infection on 5 Jun 2017 at which time she was noted to be in stable condition, having been identified as an asymptomatic contact of a confirmed MERS-CoV infected individual. Classified as a secondary healthcare acquired case in a healthcare worker. - Mod.MPP] 5- A 35-year old Saudi female, non-healthcare worker with no co-morbidities. [Reported as a newly confirmed case/infection on 7 Jun 2017 at which time she was noted to be in stable condition, having been identified as an asymptomatic contact of a confirmed MERS-CoV infected individual. Classified as a secondary case in a household contact. - Mod.MPP] 6- A 26-year-old expat female, healthcare worker with no co-morbidities. [Reported as a newly confirmed case/infection on 9 Jun 2017 at which time she was noted to be in stable condition, having been identified as an asymptomatic contact of a confirmed MERS-CoV infected individual. Classified as a secondary healthcare acquired case in a healthcare worker. - Mod.MPP] 7- A 31-year-old expat female, healthcare worker with no co-morbidities. [Reported as a newly confirmed case/infection on 8 Jun 2017 at which time she was noted to be in stable condition, having been identified as an asymptomatic contact of a confirmed MERS-CoV infected individual. Classified as a secondary healthcare acquired case in a healthcare worker. - Mod.MPP] 8- A 48-year-old expat female, healthcare worker with no co-morbidities. [Reported as a newly confirmed case/infection on 9 Jun 2017 at which time she was noted to be in stable condition, having been identified as an asymptomatic contact of a confirmed MERS-CoV infected individual. Classified as a secondary healthcare acquired case in a healthcare worker. - Mod.MPP] 9- A 35-year-old expat male, healthcare worker with no co-morbidities. [Reported as a newly confirmed case/infection on 11 Jun 2017 at which time he was noted to be in stable condition, having been identified as an asymptomatic contact of a confirmed MERS-CoV infected individual. Classified as a secondary healthcare acquired case in a healthcare worker. - Mod.MPP] Date: Fri 16 Jun 2017 (1 recovery) 10- A 31-year-old expat female, healthcare worker with no co-morbidities. [Reported as a newly confirmed case/infection on 9 Jun 2017 at which time she was noted to be in stable condition, having been identified as an asymptomatic contact of a confirmed MERS-CoV infected individual. Classified as a secondary healthcare acquired case in a healthcare worker. - Mod.MPP] -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail [During the period 16-18 Jun 2017, there were a total of 4 newly confirmed cases, 2 of whom were attributed to the nosocomial transmission ongoing in Riyadh -- one in a patient and one in a healthcare worker. The other 2 cases included an individual from Hufoof and an individual from Riyadh, both of whom were classified as primary cases but still under investigation for possible high risk exposures. In this same period there were 3 newly reported fatalities, 2 of whom were classified as secondary healthcare acquired cases in patients, associated with the nosocomial transmission in Riyadh. The 3rd fatality was reported from Hufoof in an individual with a history of direct exposure to camels in the 14 days preceding onset of illness. While it appears as though the nosocomial transmission cycles in Riyadh may be slowing down, it is too early to make definitive statements. Maps showing the locations within Saudi Arabia of the cases identified in the summary report above can be found at the source URLs. The HealthMap/ProMED map of Saudi Arabia can be found at  . - Mod.MPP] [", "STREPTOCOCCUS, GROUP A - USA (02): (ARIZONA) PHARYNGITIS, FIRE FIGHTERS *********************************************************************** A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Mon 19 Jun 2017 8 PM MDT Source: Tucson News Now [edited] A bacterial infection has spread in the Frye Fire firefighter camp, forcing personnel to be quarantined. As of Sunday morning [18 Jan 2017], there are 45 confirmed cases of strep throat, or streptococcal pharyngitis, among firefighters on the Frye Fire incident, according to public information officer Evan Burks. The initial cases were first reported Saturday afternoon [17 Jun 2017] on the Inciweb page. The Frye Fire is burning near Safford in Graham County, and was started by lightning on [7 Jun 2017] [ ]. Burks said when mass illness strikes, like strep throat, protocol is to assign an incident commander for \"the incident within the incident. We assign somebody to be the incident commander of that incident so that normal fire operations can continue while the issue is dealt with by a separate group of people,\" Burks said. A medical group was created with doctors and nurses being brought to the Safford area to help with the strep throat outbreak. Burks said antibiotics were administered and the affected fire personnel were quarantined, but will not be sent home. \"We have not released those resources. They're still here. But we have separated them from the healthy firefighters,\" Burks explained. \"The antibiotics start working within 24 hours, and it looks like the firefighters are getting healthy pretty quickly here. Once they're healthy, and good to go, they'll be back to work [on the Frye Fire].\" Medical personnel have identified those with strep throat and they are taking \"extra precautions to wash hands, and stay healthy,\" Burks explained. \"That's always the number one priority, to keep our firefighters healthy. But there is always that risk out there.\" Burks would not say that it is \"common\" for illness outbreaks like strep throat to occur in large firefighting camps, where personnel live in close quarters. The latest news release, sent out Sunday morning [18 Jun 2017], showed the Frye Fire had grown to 6305 acres [2552 ha] since it started nearly 2 weeks ago. Burks said the fire is 16 percent contained, and they have no reports of homes being threatened by flames. The news release said the Frye Fire is burning among timber, brush, and heavy, downed timber from the 2004 Nuttall Complex [fire]. It is located in the Safford Ranger District of the Coronado National Forest, about 7 miles [11.3 km] southwest of Safford. There are closures in effect for \"all campgrounds, roadways, and trail systems north of Shannon Campground at the junction of Highway 366 and Forest Road 507 where the pavement ends,\" the news release said. \"Graham County Sheriff's Office will stop any non-fire traffic at this point to maintain safety. State trust lands are not public lands and therefore access will be restricted to lease holders only.\" The closure order affects Treasure Park, Hospital Flat, Upper Hospital Flat, Cunningham, Soldier Creek, Columbine Corrals, Riggs Flat, and Clark Peak Corrals. Temporary flight restrictions remain in effect until further notice, the news release explained. \"This restriction includes 'drones' or any unmanned aerial vehicles. The public is reminded that 'If you fly, we can't!'\" They have 306 personnel assigned to the Frye Fire, and Burks said he has no expectation of the number of infected patients growing. According to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, strep throat is an infection in the throat and tonsils \"caused by group A _Streptococcus_ bacteria (called \"group A strep\"). The bacteria are spread through contact with droplets after an infected person coughs or sneezes.\" The CDC website said that, \"if you touch your mouth, nose, or eyes after touching something that has these droplets on it, you may become ill. If you drink from the same glass or eat from the same plate as a sick person, you could also become ill.\" [Byline: Evan Schreiber] -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts [Exposure to inhaled irritants from a forest fire can itself cause pharyngitis ( ) and smoke, for example from cigarettes, may predispose to group A streptococcus (GAS) pharyngitis ( ). GAS can be highly contagious; skin lesions, poor personal hygiene and crowded living conditions can be expected to facilitate its spread from person to person. Some strains of GAS are more virulent than others. Tissue invasiveness of GAS has been attributed to several virulence factors, especially the cell wall M protein, encoded by the _emm_ gene. Strains have been typed based on the antigenic specificity of its M protein. More recently GAS are typed on the basis of sequence analysis of the portion of the _emm_ gene that encodes M serospecificity ( ). Over 200 _emm_ types have been identified. Other molecular techniques to further characterize outbreak strains include pulse-field gel electrophoresis (PFGE) of chromosomal DNA fragments, multilocus sequence typing (MLST), and detection of exotoxin-encoding genes ( ,  ,  , and  ). Molecular analysis of the isolates aids documenting a common source of an outbreak. Graham County is a county located in the southeastern part of the US state of Arizona ( ). The county seat is Safford and because of its isolation, several observatories are located on Mt Graham, southwest of Safford ( ). - Mod.ML] [", "CHOLERA, DIARRHEA AND DYSENTERY UPDATE (56): ASIA (YEMEN) ********************************************************* A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases [1] Date: Tue 20 Jun 2017 15:20:20 CST Source: Xinhua News Agency [edited] \"Since the beginning of this outbreak, 166 976 suspected cases and 1146 deaths have been reported from 20 of the country's 23 governorates,\" WHO said on its website on 20 Jun 2017. Earlier in June 2017, the United Nations International Children's Emergency Fund (UNICEF) expected suspected cases could hit 130 000 in 2 weeks, while in May 2017, WHO expected they could reach 300 000 in the next 6 months. The outbreak has spread fast in 20 out of 23 Yemeni governorates in just 7 weeks, since 27 Apr 2017. Yemen is facing total collapse as the war continues. 2/3 of the total population, around 19 million, need humanitarian and protection aid. About 10.3 million people are close to famine and 14.5 million lack access to safe drinking water. Less than 45 percent of the country's hospitals are operational at the moment, but even the operational ones are coping with huge challenges, on top of which is the lack of medications, medical equipment and staffs. The blockade on Yemen, part of a Saudi-led bombing campaign launched in March 2015, has deepened the crisis in the country which used to import most of its basic needs. -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail ****** [2] Date: Tue 20 Jun 2017 Source: UN Integrated Regional Information Networks (IRIN) News [edited] One million doses of an emergency oral cholera vaccine from a global stockpile has been approved for urgent use in Yemen, IRIN has learnt. It is the largest quantity ever deployed at once and is intended to help combat a deadly outbreak sweeping across the war-torn country. At the latest count, there were 167 000 cases and 1146 deaths in Yemen, equating to a death every hour by the _Vibrio cholera_ bacterium, which causes severe dehydration and diarrhea. In just 2 months, Yemen's death toll from the outbreak already accounts for 1.2 percent of the global average of estimated annual deaths from cholera. \"The speed of the spread of the disease is unprecedented,\" Dr Nevio Zagaria, the World Health Organization's representative in Yemen, told IRIN. The International Coordinating Group [ICG], a body established in 2013 to manage to the global stockpile of emergency cholera vaccines, made the decision to deploy the vaccine in Yemen last week [week of 12 Jun 2017], although no official announcement has yet been made. Zagaria's team submitted the request to the ICG for access to the stockpile, and he said the 1st doses are expected to arrive on the ground early in July 2017. \"We are discussing with health authorities the targeting and planning of the campaign tentatively for the 1st days of July [2017],\" he added. International health officials say the emergency vaccinations are necessary to contain the burgeoning epidemic in Yemen, which, after over 2 years of war, is suffering an acute lack of infrastructure to deal with diseases like cholera. \"As the conflict continues, it continuously erodes the existing basic social services. It has affected the healthcare, water and sanitation systems, which have been damaged or run out of fuel to operate,\" explained Bismarck Swangin, a UNICEF spokesman based in the capital, Sana'a. Less than half of Yemen's health facilities remain operational. The rest have been bombed and destroyed, and those hospitals still standing face dire shortages in power, supplies, and staff. [Byline: Naomi Stewart] -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail [The statistics of the impressive ongoing epidemic in Yemen in 2017 are: Date (2017) / Cases / Deaths 8 May / 1360 / 25 11 May / 2752 / 51 13 May / 8595 / 115 14 May / 11 000 / 180 17 May / 17 200 / 209 19 May / 23 500 / 242 21 May / 29 300 / 315 22 May / 35 217 / 361 24 May / 42 207 / 420 27 May / 51 832 / 471 30 May / 65 300 / 532 02 Jun / 73 700 / 605 04 Jun / 86 400 / 676 05 Jun / 91 400 / 728 06 Jun / 96 000 / 746 07 Jun / 101 820 / 789 10 Jun / 116 700 / 869 12 Jun / 124 002 / 923 14 Jun / 140 116 / 989 16 Jun / 151 000 / 1054 19 Jun / 166 976 / 1146 To be consistent with past posts, the date is the day prior to the specific posting but, as this one, may not reflect the data point day. In about 7 weeks, almost 140 000 cases and 1000 deaths have been reported with no clear sign of the numbers slowing down. Aggressive interventions to stem this substantial outbreak in Yemen including sources of clean water and a vaccination campaign are problematic because of the ongoing conflict in the country. An intervention with vaccine, if possible, could potentially stem the tide of the ongoing event. The following is extracted from Lutwick LI, Preis J, Choi P: Cholera. In: Chronic illness and disability: the pediatric gastrointestinal tract. Greydanus DE, Atay O, Merrick J (eds). NY: Nova Bioscience, 2017 (in press): \"For a variety of logistic, financial, and historical reasons, vaccines have not been available for cholera control programs outside of Viet Nam. Given as 2 or 3 dose courses, efficacy can be as high as 60-80 per cent for at least 2-3 years but much shorter protection lengths in children younger than 5 years of age. Cost-effectiveness, especially once an outbreak has occurred, had remained unproven until reports from Guinea (57) and Haiti (58) demonstrated utility. \"The current vaccines prequalified for use by WHO (59) are: - Dukoral (produced in Sweden) that contains several biotypes of O1 with recombinant cholera toxin B subunit, which also offers some protection against enterotoxigenic _E. coli_; - Shanchol (produced in India) that contains biotypes of both O1 and O139 without the recombinant B unit. In a large study in Kolkata, India, a cluster-randomized, double blind, placebo-controlled study of this product (60), the cumulative efficacy of the vaccine at 5 years was 65 per cent (95 per cent CI 52-74, p less than 0.0001). A locally-produced vaccine similar to this vaccine (mORCVAX) is produced in Viet Nam; - Euvichol (produced in South Korea) that, like Shanchol, contains both O1 and O139 without recombinant B subunit. This vaccine has been reported to be non-inferior to Shanchol in a Philippine study (61). In June 2016, the US FDA for the 1st time approved a cholera vaccine for use locally in travelers to cholera-endemic areas. This vaccine, Vaxchora, is an oral live, attenuated biologic (62) that is a reformulation of a previous product. This product, a single dose immunization also referred to as CVD 102-HgR, must be stored in the frozen state and as a live, attenuated bacterial vaccine is not given until at least 14 days after antibacterials were used and should be given at least 10 days before oral chloroquine antimalarial prophylaxis. Single dose use is an advantage over the older inactivated products which are given in 2 doses. Studies, however, have suggested that one dose of these inactivated oral vaccines can be effective when the vaccines are in short supply in both endemic and outbreak situations (63, 64). References ---------- 57. Luquero FJ, Grout L, Ciglenecki I, et al. Use of _Vibrio cholerae_ vaccine in an outbreak in Guinea. N Engl J Med. 2014; 370(22): 2111-2120; . 58. S\u00e9v\u00e8re K, Rouzier V, Anglade SB, et al. Effectiveness of oral cholera vaccine in Haiti: 37-month follow-up. Am J Trop Med Hyg. 2016; 94(5): 1136-1142;  . 59. Bhattacharya SK, Sur D, Ali M, et al. 5 year efficacy of a bivalent killed whole-cell oral cholera vaccine in Kolkata, India: a cluster-randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial. Lancet Inf Dis. 2013; 13(12): 1050-1056;  . 60. WHO. WHO prequalified vaccines.  . 61. Balk YO, Choi SK, Olveda RM, et al. A randomized, non-inferiority trial comparing two bivalent killed, whole cell, oral cholera vaccines (Euvichol vs Shanchol) in the Philippines. Vaccine 2015; 33(46): 6350-65; . 62. Freedman DO. Re-born in the USA: another cholera vaccine for travellers. Travel Med Infect Dis. 2016; 14(4): 295-6; abstract available at  . 63. Qadri F, Wierzba TF, Ali M, et al. Efficacy of a single dose, inactivated oral cholera vaccine in Bangladesh. N Engl J Med. 2016; 374(18): 1723-32;  . 64. Azman AS, Parker LA, Rumunu J, et al. Effectiveness of one dose of oral cholera vaccine in response to an outbreak: a case-cohort study. Lancet Global Health 2016; 4(11): e856-e863;  .\" - Mod.LL A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  .] [", "CIGUATERA FISH POISONING - EU (02): POSSIBLE LOCAL FISH SOURCE ************************************************************** A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Mon 19 Jun 2017 Source: EpiCore Global Surveillance Project [edited] This problem is known in the EU since at least 10 years with outbreaks related to proved local fish consumption documented at least in Canary Islands (Spain) and Madeira (Portugal), see for example: [ref: Canals A, Diog\u00e8ne J, Gago A. EuroCigua, risk characterization of ciguatera food poisoning in Europe. ECsafeSEAFOOD Project - Final Conference, 25-26 Jan 2017;  ] ---------------------------------------------------------------------- Abstract -------- \"Since 2008, autochthonous ciguatera food poisoning (CFP) outbreaks have been reported in Spain (Canary Islands) and in Portugal (Madeira). In the Canary Islands the fish genus _Seriola_ was involved in many of the outbreaks. _Gambierdiscus_ spp., microalgae responsible for CFP, was also detected in the waters of the Madeira and Canary Islands. In order to characterize the risk of CFP in the European Union, the European Food Safety Authority (EFSA) and 14 European organizations have signed a Framework Partnership Agreement (FPA) that is co-funded by EFSA aimed to characterize the risk of ciguatera food poisoning in Europe (EuroCigua). The main goal of Specific Agreement (SA) no. 1 is the management and the scientific coordination of the project. It is coordinated by the Spanish Agency for Consumer Affairs Food Safety and Nutrition (AECOSAN). The SA no. 2 aims to determine the incidence of ciguatera in Europe and the epidemiological characteristics of cases, and it is coordinated by the Institute of Health Carlos III (ISCIII). The assessment of the presence of ciguatoxin in food and the environment is the main objective of SA no. 3, coordinated by the Institute for Research and Technology in Food and Agriculture (IRTA). Finally, the SA no. 4 is coordinated by the University of Vigo (UVigo), whose main target is to develop and validate methods for the detection, quantification, and confirmation of the presence of ciguatoxin contaminated specimens. This innovative project joins efforts of research organizations, epidemiology institutions and competent authorities on food safety from several European Member States. The project has strong links to European institutions and international research institutions across the world in order to use this experience for the characterization of this intoxication in Europe as well as its impact in public health. The project started in June 2016 and will run for 4 years.\" [Ref: Nunez D, Matute P, Garcia A, et al. Outbreak of ciguatera food poisoning by consumption of amberjack (_Seriola_ spp.) in the Canary Islands, May 2012. Euro Surveill. 2012; 17(23): pii=20188;  ] ---------------------------------------------------------------------- Abstract -------- \"In May 2012 a family outbreak of ciguatera food poisoning, affecting 4 people, was detected in Tenerife, Canary Islands. The outbreak was caused by eating amberjack fish (_Seriola_ spp.) bought in a local market. This is the 3rd outbreak of ciguatera food poisoning in the Canary Islands in 2012. We describe the epidemiology of this outbreak.\" The problem is well known and the articles are now referring to recent initiatives trying to better characterize the risk at EU level as Canary Islands and Madeira only represent islands that are quite far from the EU \"mainland\" (actually closer to Africa). In particular, the EU Food Safety Agency (EFSA) is currently implementing a cooperation project involving 13 different official organizations from 6 EU countries to better define this risk in the entire EU (EUROCIGUA)  . So far, cases related to local consumption only in Canary Islands and Madeira (technically EU but actually geographically closer to Africa). Other cases, as the \"German outbreak\" were related to imported fish. In the past ciguatera local cases have been reported in relation to consumption to fish in the Mediterranean Sea, so this could happen again, but nothing recalling any recent increase. Example, in 1988, Israel coast: [ref: Raikhlin-Eisenkraft B, Finkelstein Y, Spanier E: Ciguatera-like poisoning in the Mediterranean. Vet Hum Toxicol. 1988; 30(6): 582-3;  ] ---------------------------------------------------------------------- Abstract -------- \"A case of group poisoning from the consumption of the fish _Sarpa salpa_, caught in the Mediterranean coastal waters of Israel, is presented. Mullets and rabbitfish caught at the same site caused no harm. This is the 3rd case of ciguatera poisoning in the region and the 1st to be transferred by a fish which is not a Red Sea immigrant. It implies that toxic algae dinoflagellates, originating from the Red Sea, crossed the Suez Canal and found their way to the Mediterranean coastal waters.\" -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail [ProMED thanks a member of the EpiCore Global Surveillance Project for contributing this valuable information regarding ciguatera in the Mediterranean area. - Mod.LL A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  .] [", "BOTULISM - MOROCCO (02): (DRAA-TAFILALET) FATAL *********************************************** A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Mon 19 Jun 2017, 9:09 AM Source: The Economist [in French, machine trans., edited] The [3rd] victim of collective food poisoning, which occurred in Ouarzazate a few days ago, died last [Fri 16 Jun 2017]. The father, who had escaped _Clostridium botulinum_ (botulism) poisoning because he was travelling, lost his wife and 2 daughters. The girl, who has been in a coma for more than 2 weeks, was buried in Meknes yesterday [Sun 18 Jun 2017] The causes of the intoxication have not yet been clearly defined despite the analysis of all foods consumed by the victims. -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts [It remains unclear what the vehicle of this cluster of reported botulism was. - Mod.LL A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  .] [", "HEPATITIS E - NIGER (06): (DIFFA) FATAL, PREGNANT WOMEN ******************************************************* A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Tue 20 Jun 2017 Source: EIN News [edited] In southeastern Niger, the hepatitis E outbreak declared 2 months ago is particularly affecting pregnant women. Of the 186 women admitted to the main maternal and pediatric health centre in the town of Diffa [from 2 Jan 2017 to 11 Jun 2017], 34 died of severe complications related to the disease. Of the 876 cases of hepatitis E reported by [11 Jun 2017], the majority are displaced people and refugees, 247 900 according to the authorities. As the disease spreads mainly through contaminated water, the current outbreak highlights poor water and sanitation conditions and the lack of adequate sanitation facilities among these people, already affected by the violence of the ongoing conflict between Boko Haram and the armies of the region. Instability and lack of infrastructure -------------------------------------- In Diffa, where access to healthcare has been hampered in particular by insecurity, the lack of adequate water, sanitation and hygiene infrastructure has an even greater impact on the health situation. Several sites within the displaced camps and communities do not have an adequate supply of drinking water, leaving some of the needs of the most vulnerable populations unmet. In addition, there is a lack of latrines, and those that are in place are in poor conditions. >From the experience of other hepatitis E outbreaks in Africa, the Diffa one could last for several more months. The number of suspected cases may increase further in the near future, with the arrival of the rainy season, usually from June to September. \"Given the scarcity of water for the most vulnerable populations, the risk is that alternative sources that can spread the outbreak will be used, such as the supply from streams and other natural water points formed by accumulated rain water. These collection points are considered as potential vectors of the disease\", explains Audace Ntezukobagira, emergency coordinator for MSF in Diffa. \"It is also important to take into account that these people do not have the material or financial means to stock up on wood or gas, to boil the water in order to make it suitable for consumption.\" Water, hygiene and sanitation ----------------------------- To respond to the outbreak, one of the priorities is the strengthening of water and sanitation activities. However, the current response has not yet reached the standard required due to insufficient resources and coordination between humanitarian actors. At certain sites, for example, it can be seen that jerry cans which are unsuitable for transporting water are not systematically collected when they are replaced. \"This provokes a clear problem in terms of the risk of spreading the disease, as well as creating confusion as new jerry cans could be distributed several times in the same place\", says Sabiou Mansour, logistics manager for the MSF emergency team in Diffa. \"It is deplorable, considering the efforts already provided in the region and the magnitude of the needs.\" Since April 2017, MSF has strengthened its capacity to deploy emergency sanitation and hygiene measures at 11 sites. The teams working on more than 130 functional water points ensured that more than 6300 cubic-meters of water was chlorinated, 127 300 jerry cans were washed, nearly 3400 old ones were replaced with new ones, and cleaning kits, including more than 36 800 soaps, were distributed. For Sani Toubomrabo, a Nigerian community leader based in Garin Wazam, \"the chlorinated water we bring home is useful to avoid getting sick, which is why we collaborate with the health agents present at the water points.\" Patient treatment ----------------- The response to the outbreak also includes free management of patients in health facilities at the community level and referral to hospital for those patients who develop complications. In this respect, MSF teams are supporting the health authorities with human and material resources that have been deployed to deal with the situation. In addition to medical treatment, patients with hepatitis E receive psychological support. The organization also provides technical support for health staff in the structures in which it operates in order to ensure free and high-quality care for patients. A decrease in mortality was also observed among women with severe complications related to the disease admitted to the main maternal and paediatric health centre in the town of Diffa. Awareness-raising in the heart of the community ----------------------------------------------- Health promotion activities in the health facilities and the community have also been set up by MSF. To date [Tue 20 Jun 2017], nearly 32 000 people have been informed, including patients and their families. At the same time, MSF is actively looking for cases in villages, which has already led to the referral of more than 400 people to health centres. MSF in Diffa ------------ Since the end of 2014, MSF has been working in the Diffa region to help those fleeing violence related to the presence of the Boko Haram group and military intervention in the region. MSF provides free medical and psychological assistance in 7 health centres in the region. In addition, the organization supports the supply of drinking water supply, the construction of latrines and the distribution of essential items in several villages and places where refugees, returnees and displaced people have gathered. In addition, MSF is supporting the Ministry of Health in 2 hospitals: the Nguigmi Hospital and the main maternal and child health centre in the Diffa town. In both hospitals, MSF is working in reproductive and pediatric health units, and provides mental health support. At the hospital in Nguigmi, the team also treats children suffering from severe acute malnutrition. -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts [Much of the mortality in hepatitis E occurs in woman in the 2nd and 3rd trimesters of pregnancy. The following regarding hepatitis E virus infection during pregnancy is extracted from: Chaudhry SA, Verma N and Koren G: Hepatitis E infection during pregnancy. Can Fam Physician. 2015; 6(7)1: 607-608;  . \"Hepatitis E infection during pregnancy and in the 3rd trimester, especially with genotype 1, is associated with more severe infection and might lead to fulminant hepatic failure and maternal death (11-13). Although the mechanism of liver injury is not yet clear, it is possible that interplay of hormonal and immunologic changes during pregnancy, along with a high viral load of HEV, renders the woman more vulnerable (14). Immunologic changes during pregnancy promote the maintenance of the fetus in the maternal environment by suppression of T cell-mediated immunity, rendering pregnant women more susceptible to viral infections like HEV infection. During pregnancy, levels of progesterone, estrogen, and human chorionic gonadotropin increase as pregnancy advances. These hormones play a considerable role in altering immune regulation and increasing viral replications (15). \"Hepatitis E infection with genotype 1 during the 3rd trimester can lead to maternal mortality in up to 15 per cent to 25 per cent of cases (16). Most of the studies showing high maternal mortality are from India, where infection occurs in epidemics. There is a very high risk of vertical transmission of HEV from the mother to the fetus. During a Delhi epidemic, a hospital-based study revealed that HEV infection during pregnancy was associated with miscarriage, stillbirth, or neonatal death in 56 per cent of infants (6). One recent study highlights that HEV infection might be responsible for 2400 to 3000 stillbirths each year in developing countries, with many additional fetal deaths linked to antenatal maternal deaths (11). There is a very high risk of preterm delivery in pregnant women with HEV infection, with poor neonatal survival rates (11,17). In 2 separate studies from India, 15 per cent to 50 per cent of live-born infants of mothers with HEV infection died within 1 week of birth (11,18). During an outbreak in Sudan in 2010 to 2011, among 39 pregnant women with HEV infection there were 14 intrauterine deaths and 9 premature deliveries (19).\" References ---------- 6. Naidu SS and Viswanathan R. Infectious hepatitis in pregnancy during Delhi epidemic. Indian J Med Res. 1957; 45(Suppl): 71-76. 11. Patra S, Kumar A, Trivedi SS, Puri M and Sarin SK. Maternal and fetal outcomes in pregnant women with acute hepatitis E virus infection. Ann Intern Med. 2007; 147(1): 28-33; abstract available at  . 12. Teo CG. Fatal outbreaks of jaundice in pregnancy and the epidemic history of hepatitis E. Epidemiol Infect. 2012; 140(5): 767-87; abstract available at . 13. Devi SG, Kumar A, Kar P, Husain SA and Sharma S. Association of pregnancy outcome with cytokine gene polymorphisms in HEV infection during pregnancy. J Med Virol. 2014; 86(8): 1366-76; abstract available at  . 14. Fiore S and Savasi V. Treatment of viral hepatitis in pregnancy. Expert Opin Pharmacother. 2009; 10(17): 2801-2809; abstract available at . 15. Navaneethan U, Al Mohajer M and Shata MT. Hepatitis E and pregnancy: understanding the pathogenesis. Liver Int. 2008; 28(9): 1190-9; available at  . 16. Ranger-Rogez S, Alain S and Denis F. Hepatitis viruses: mother to child transmission [in French]. Pathol Biol (Paris) 2002; 50(9): 568-75; abstract available at  . 17. Krain LJ, Atwell JE, Nelson KE and Labrique AB. Fetal and neonatal health consequences of vertically transmitted hepatitis E virus infection. Am J Trop Med Hyg. 2014; 90(2): 365-70; available at  . 18. Rasheeda CA, Navaneethan U, Jayanthi V. Liver disease in pregnancy and its influence on maternal and fetal mortality: a prospective study from Chennai, Southern India. Eur J Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2008; 20(4): 362-4. 19. Rayis DA, Jumaa AM, Gasim GI, Karsany MS and Adam I. An outbreak of hepatitis E and high maternal mortality at Port Sudan, Eastern Sudan. Pathog Glob Health. 2013; 107(2): 66-8;  . - Mod.LL A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  .] [", "LASSA FEVER - WEST AFRICA (22): NIGERIA (ANAMBRA) ************************************************* A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Mon 19 Jun 2017 Source: 360 News [edited] The authorities of Anambra State on [Mon 19 Jun 2017] confirmed that a nursing student was killed by Lassa Fever, while 65 others were being monitored. Speaking with newsmen in Awka, the Director of Public Health, State Ministry of Health, Dr Emmanuel Okafor, said that the deceased (name withheld) was a student in a private nursing school in Nkpor, Idemili North. Okafor said that the lady was admitted at the Chukwuemeka Odumegwu Ojukwu University Teaching Hospital, Awka, on [Sun 11 Jun 2017]. According to him, she was immediately transferred to the General Hospital, Irua, in Edo for diagnosis where she died on [Sat 17 Jun 2017]. \"She was initially admitted at Amaku in Awka before she was transferred to Irua and was placed on admission there. She was bleeding from the gums, nostril and vagina and was confirmed Lassa Fever victim in Irua. \"The moment it was confirmed that she had Lassa fever, we started contacts tracing. As of now, we have about 65 we are following up, 2 of them have developed fever and their samples have been taken to Irua. We are still tracking others and we have advised them on what to do to ensure they do not transfer it to their loved ones,\" he said. Residents were also urged to keep their surroundings clean and keep their foods free from rats. It would be recalled, in May [2017], a member of the NYSC, Onwuegbuzie Stanley-Samuel, deployed to Cross River, died of Lassa fever disease at the University of Calabar Teaching Hospital (UCTH). -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts [Although Lassa fever was reported in 20 states in the week 21 [week 19 to 25 Mar 2017] Weekly Epidemiological Report issued on 9 Jun 2017, Anambra state was not included. However, appearance of cases in Anambra state is not surprising. Lassa fever remains a problem in Nigeria because the virus is endemic there. Virus transmission to humans occurs when people are in contact with the reservoir rodent host, the multimammate mouse (in the genus _Mastomys_) or their excreta. Transmission also occurs in health facilities when personal protective equipment is not employed and barrier nursing practices are not adequate to protect staff from blood and secretions of infected patients. The circumstances under which this unfortunate nursing student was exposed to the virus are not indicated in the above report. Images of _Mastomys_ mice, the rodent reservoir of Lass fever virus, can be seen at . Maps of Nigeria can be accessed at  and  . - Mod.TY] [", "FOOT & MOUTH DISEASE - MYANMAR: (RAKHINE) SEROTYPE ASIA 1, BOVINE, OIE ********************************************************************** A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Fri 16 Jun 2017 Source: OIE, WAHID (World Animal Health Information Database), weekly disease information 2017; 30(25) [edited] Foot and mouth disease, Myanmar ------------------------------- Information received on [and dated] 16 Jun 2017 from Dr Ye Tun Win, Chief Veterinary Officer Director General, Livestock Breeding and Veterinary Department, Ministry of Livestock and Fisheries, Nay Pyi Taw, Myanmar Summary Report type: immediate notification (final report) Date of start of the event: 15 Jan 2017 Date of confirmation of the event: 12 Jun 2017 Date event resolved: 6 Feb 2017 Reason for notification: recurrence of a listed disease Date of previous occurrence: 2001 Manifestation of disease: clinical disease Causal agent: foot and mouth disease virus Serotype: Asia 1 Nature of diagnosis: clinical, laboratory (basic and advanced) This event pertains to a defined zone within the country. New outbreaks (1) Summary of outbreaks: Total outbreaks: 1 Outbreak 1: Saparhtar, Kyaukphyu, Rakhine State Date of start of the outbreak: 15 Jan 2017 Outbreak status: resolved on 6 Feb 2017 Epidemiological unit: village Affected animals: Species / Susceptible / Cases / Deaths / Destroyed / Slaughtered Cattle / 1559 / 59 / 0 / 0 / 0 Affected population: Local species Outbreak statistics [rates apparent, expressed as percentages] Species / Morbidity rate / Mortality rate / Case fatality rate / Proportion susceptible animals lost* Cattle / 3.78 / 0 / 0 / 0 *Removed from the susceptible population through death, destruction, and/or slaughter Epidemiology Source of the outbreak(s) or origin of infection: unknown or inconclusive Epidemiological comments: Contact with infected neighbouring species at grazing point. According to OIE reference Laboratory, Pirbright Institute, UK: serotype is Asia 1, topotype is ASIA and lineage is G-VIII. Note from the WAHIAD: the date of last occurrence corresponds to the serotype. Control measures Measures applied: movement control inside the country; vaccination in response to the outbreak (s); quarantine; disinfection; no treatment of affected animals Measures to be applied: zoning Diagnostic test results Laboratory name and type / Species / Test / Test date / Result Foot and mouth disease laboratory (National laboratory) / Cattle / enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) / 23 Feb 2017 / Positive Pirbright Institute (OIE Reference Laboratory) / Cattle / gene sequencing / 12 Jun 2017 / Positive Future reporting The event is resolved. No more reports will be submitted. [The location of the outbreak can be seen on the interactive map included in the OIE report at the source URL above.] -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail [FMD is endemic in Myanmar, according to the Myanmar page on the WRLFMD (World Reference Laboratory for Foot-and-Mouth Disease) website  , last updated in 2017, the following serotypes have been recorded there throughout the years: FMDV-O: 1956-1958, 1971, 1977-1978, 1982, 1989, 1996, 1998-2011, 2015-2017 FMDV-A: 1971, 1978, 2010, 2015 FMDV-Asia 1: 1958, 1971, 1977-1978, 1982, 1989, 1991, 1997, 2000-2001, 2005, 2017. - Mod CRD Subscribers are referred to the following comments on Myanmar (Pool 1), as published in the last (April 2017) monthly FAO/EC/EUFMD \"Global Foot-and-Mouth Disease Situation\" report: \"The analysis conducted by the WRLFMD on the VP1 sequence data submitted by the OIE Regional Reference Laboratory for FMD in Southeast Asia, Thailand relative to 13 FMDV field isolates collected in April 2017 in Myanmar, confirmed the circulation of Asia 1/ASIA/GVIII, O/ME-SA/Ind2001d and O/SEA/Mya-98 in this country. \"The detection of Asia 1 in a field sample relative to 2017, denotes the re-emergence of the serotype in this area, after its last detection in 2006 in Vietnam and 2009 in China (People's Rep. of) and it's most recent report in 2016 by Cambodia in WAHIS. The most closely related field virus not pertaining to the country is represented by BAN GA Sr-187 2013, with a seq id of 97.6 percent. This virus was isolated in cattle in Bangladesh, country that belongs to Pool 2\". Notably, the guest editor of the April monthly report, Dr Mark Bronsvoort (Roslin Institute and Royal -Dick- School of Veterinary Studies, University of Edinburgh, UK) commented: \"The re-emergence of Asia1 in this region is of concern after several years of not being reported. Given its closeness to an isolate from neighbouring Bangladesh from 2013, it raises many questions about where [whether?] this virus has been circulating undetected in the region or if this represents vaccine escape\". The reported absence of clinical cases in the sampled cattle farm is in line with Dr Bronsvoort's remark, indicating the need to exclude vaccine-sourced virus. Subscribers are encouraged to access the report, which includes additional information and maps, at  . - Mod.AS A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  .] [", "TILAPIA SYNCYTIAL HEPATITIS - TAIWAN (02): (TAOYUAN CITY) EMERGING DISEASE, SPREAD ********************************************************************************** A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Tue 20 Jun 2017 Source: Taipei Times [edited] In related news, the number of ponds in Taoyuan infected with tilapia lake virus (TiLV) has increased to 7, COA Minister Lin Tsung-hsien told a news conference in Taipei yesterday [Mon 19 Jun 2017]. Lin added that infected fish have not made it to markets. The council on [Fri 16 Jun 2017] formed an ad hoc committee to discuss ways to deal with the outbreak, Lin said, adding that experts met in the Executive Yuan yesterday [Mon 19 Jun 2017]. Of the 7 infected ponds in Taoyuan's Guanyin District, dead fish were found in only 2 ponds, Lin said. \"Infected fish lose blood and have swollen eyes -- visible symptoms that mean they are unlikely to be sold in markets,\" he said. The council and the city government on [Mon 12 Jun 2017] last week announced a 2-week transport restriction, he added. Tilapia imports from nations with TiLV outbreaks, including China, Israel, Thailand and Egypt, will be banned, while controls over fish imported from other nations will be tightened, COA Deputy Minister Huang Chin-cheng said. The council has examined 23 ponds in Taoyuan within a 3 km [approx 1.86 mi] radius of the 1st affected pond, while 30 other ponds in a 5 km [approx 3.1 mi] radius are to be examined, he added. The council also examined samples from 11 fisheries in other regions, but no infected tilapia was found elsewhere, Lin said. Taoyuan Mayor Cheng Wen-tsan on [Sun 18 Jun 2017] urged the council to offer full reimbursement to affected fish farmers, but Lin said the case is not like avian flu, adding: \"No reimbursement will be offered as the council did not kill the infected fish.\" Tilapias that are susceptible to the virus are mainly of the species _Oreochromis niloticus_, the council's Fisheries Research Institute Director Chen Chu-ju said. The source of the virus is being investigated, but it might have existed in the nation for a while, Chen said, adding that the mortality rate of 6.7 percent is relatively low in comparison with other nations where TiLV outbreaks have occurred. The institute is developing a new species of tilapia with stronger resistance to the virus, Lin said. National Taiwan University's School of Veterinary Medicine chairman Chou Chin-Cheng yesterday [Mon 19 Jun 2017] promised to help develop quick testing for the virus, he added. Lin was scheduled to examine the ponds in Taoyuan at 3 PM yesterday [Mon 19 Jun 2017], but canceled the trip in the morning. In response to media queries about the cancelation, Executive Yuan spokesperson Hsu Kuo-yung said in a statement that the epidemic's cause was not yet clear, so it was better not to disrupt the infected area at the moment. [Byline: Lin Chia-nan] -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts [Taiwan's immediate notification on the identification of this emerging fish disease, caused by Tilapia lake virus (TiLV), was submitted to the OIE on 14 Jun 2017 (http://promedmail.org/post/20170614.5105570). It reported one affected pond of farmed Tilapia (in Guanyin district, Taoyuan City). As apparent from the current media report, the virus is wider spread. The global geographic distribution of 'Tilapia lake virus\" (TiLV), was one of the issues addressed in OIE's relevant disease card, published in May 2017. Article 4 says (for the omitted references, please refer to the url at  ): \"TiLV has been reported in Colombia, Ecuador, and Israel and most recently, Egypt and Thailand. However, a lack of thorough investigation of all mortality incidents means that the geographic distribution of TiLV may be wider than currently [reported]. For example, reports of mortality in tilapia in Ghana and Zambia in 2016 have not been attributed to TiLV but the available information does not indicate that the presence of the virus has been investigated. A partial genome from Thailand showed relatively high variation to strains from Israel (around 97 percent nucleotide identity).\" On 26 May 2017, the FAO published an exhaustive special global alert (no. 338) addressing Tilapia lake virus; the document (6 pages) is available at . It includes the following interesting updated information on the evolvement of the disease in Israel, where the disease was first identified: \"In Israel, the tilapia wild catch (main species: _Sarotherodon galilaeus_) in Lake Kinneret (The Sea of Galilee) dropped significantly from an average level of 257 tons per year to 8 tons per year in 2008. The drop was linked to TiLV disease. Since 2009, the tilapia catch in Lake Kinneret has been growing continuously and reached 320 tons in 2015. Although tilapia breeders report variable survival rates especially during the hot season, the total production of cultured tilapia in the last decade has been stable, ranging from 7000 to 8000 tons per year.\" So far, only Israel and Taiwan have submitted official reports on this emerging fish disease to the OIE. Where, globally, this virus emerged first is yet to be investigated. References ---------- 1. Eyngor, M., Zamostiano, R., Kembou Tsofack, J. E., Berkowitz, A., Bercovier, H., Tinman, S., Lev, M., Huryitz, A., Galeotti, M., and Eldar, A. (2014). Identification of a novel RNA virus lethal to tilapia. Journal of Clinical Microbiology, 52 (12), 4137-4146,  . 2. Dong, H.T., Siriroob, S., Meemetta, W., Santimanawong, W., Gangnonngiw, W., Pirarat, N., Khunrae, K., Rattanarojpong, T., Vanichviriyakit, R., and Senapin, S. (2017a). Emergence of tilapia lake virus in Thailand and an alternative semi-nested RT-PCR for detection. Aquaculture 476, 111-118. 3. Dong H.T., Siriroob, S., Meemetta, W., Santimanawong, W., Gangnonngiw, W., Pirarat, N., Khunrae, P., Rattanarojpong, T., Vanichviriyakit, R. and Senapin, S. (2017b). A warning and an improved PCR detection method for tilapia lake virus (TiLV) disease in Thai tilapia farms, . 4. Fathi, M., Dickson, C., Dickson, M., Leschen, W., Baily, J., Muir, F., Ulrich, K. and Weidmann, M. (2017). Identification of Tilapia Lake Virus in Egypt in Nile tilapia affected by \"summer mortality\" syndrome. Aquaculture Vol. 472, 430-432. - Mod.AS A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  .] [", "INFLUENZA (13): WHO GLOBAL UPDATE ********************************* A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Mon 12 Jun 2017 Source: WHO Surveillance and monitoring, influenza updates [edited] Influenza update - 291 (based on data up to 28 May 2017) -------------------------------------------------------- Summary ------- In the temperate zone of the southern hemisphere, influenza activity started to increase slowly but remained low in general. Influenza activity in the temperate zone of the northern hemisphere continued to decrease. Worldwide, influenza B viruses were predominant. - In temperate South America, influenza like illness (ILI) levels increased over the prior weeks and crossed the seasonal threshold in Chile and Paraguay. Influenza activity also increased in Argentina, Chile, Paraguay and Uruguay, with influenza A(H3N2) viruses predominant. - In Southern Africa influenza activity remained low and below the seasonal threshold. - In Oceania, influenza activity remained low in Australia and New Zealand with influenza A and B viruses co-circulating. - In tropical South America, influenza activity remained low in most of the region, with influenza A(H3N2) and B viruses predominating. - In the Caribbean and Central America countries, respiratory virus activity remained low. - In East Asia, influenza activity was low in general, except in China where detections of all seasonal influenza subtypes continued to be reported. - In Southern Asia, low levels of influenza activity continued to be reported. - In Western Asia, influenza activity was low in general. - In South East Asia, influenza activity increased slightly in recent weeks, with all seasonal influenza subtypes present in the region. - In Western Africa, few influenza detections were reported in Cote d'Ivoire and Ghana. In Eastern Africa, increased influenza activity was reported in Madagascar and the Republic of Mauritius, with influenza A(H3N2) and A(H1N1)pdm09 viruses predominant, respectively. - In Northern Africa, no influenza detections were reported. - In Europe, influenza activity was low in general. In Northern and Eastern Europe, low levels of influenza B virus detections were reported. No influenza virus detections were reported in South West Europe. - In Central Asia, available reports on respiratory illness indicators indicated low activity. - In North America, influenza activity continued to decrease overall. National Influenza Centres (NICs) and other national influenza laboratories from 75 countries, areas or territories reported data to FluNet for the time period from 15 May 2017 to 28 May 2017 (data as of 9 Jun 2017 3:31:42 PM UTC).The WHO GISRS [Global Influenza Surveillance and Response System] laboratories tested more than 69 469 specimens during that time period; 5598 were positive for influenza viruses, of which 2798 (50 percent) were typed as influenza A and 2800 (50 percent) as influenza B. Of the sub-typed influenza A viruses, 897 (40.1 percent) were influenza A(H1N1)pdm09 and 1339 (59.9 percent) were influenza A(H3N2). Of the characterized B viruses, 216 (38.7 percent) belonged to the B-Yamagata lineage and 342 (61.3 percent) to the B-Victoria lineage. -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail [In most parts of Northern hemisphere, influenza activity is low or at inter-seasonal levels. In the southern hemisphere, a slight increase in influenza activity has been reported with elevated ILI activity in temperate South America and East Africa. However, individual reports of increased activity have been received from Asia, including Taiwan (influenza A/H3N2 and parainfluenza infections, -- see PRO/SOAS Influenza (40): Taiwan, situation update http://promedmail.org/post/20170615.5102472), and some reports from India (influenza A/H1N1 Pdm09- PRO/SOAS Influenza (39): India (Rajasthan) H1N1, fatal http://promedmail.org/post/20170603.5076902). No novel influenza viruses were reported. - Mod.UBA A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  .] [", "YELLOW FEVER - AMERICAS (49): BOLIVIA (COCHABAMBA), CANADA (SASKATCHEWAN) ************************************************************************* A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases In this update: [1] Bolivia (Cochabamba) [2] Canada (Saskatchewan) vaccine ****** [1] Bolivia (Cochabamba) Date: Mon 19 Jun 2017 Source: Radio Fides [in Spanish, trans. Mod.TY, edited] An 18-year-old youth, resident of Potosi who traveled constantly to Villa Tunari, died in recent hours of yellow fever, a death from that disease that has occurred after almost a decade [with no cases]. The young person had not been vaccinated. The head of Epidemiology of SEDES [Departmental Health Services], Arturo Quinones, according to a report of Radio Fides of Cochabamba, said that this person could not have been vaccinated during the mass vaccination campaign done in 2007 that was for people 12-49 years of age, as he was just 9. \"I state that the death of an 18-year-old person diagnosed with yellow fever includes in the history that this person had not been vaccinated in the 2007 vaccination campaign; we vaccinated [people] 12-49 years of age, and he did not go to the vaccination post because he did not have the opportunity to receive the vaccine,\" Quinones said. The youth travelled various time to the tropics, and on one of these occasions got the disease and later went to a health center in the tropics [Villa Tunari Hospital?], and they had him sent to the Viedma Hospital [in Cochabamba] where he died, after 6 days of hospitalization. This is the 1st death after many years [without cases]. -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail [Yellow fever (YF) virus is endemic in the Amazon Basin, including the Bolivian tropics. Sporadic human cases occur there as spill-over from the sylvan (forest) transmission cycle. On 9 Jan 2017, a Danish tourist who came to Caranavi in the tropical area of La Paz department, Bolivia became infected with the virus. Individuals residing in or traveling to these areas should be vaccinated at least 10 days before possible exposure to the virus. Had the young man in the above report done this, he would still be alive. Maps of Bolivia can be seen at  and  . - Mod.TY] ****** [2] Canada (Saskatchewan) vaccine Date: Mon 19 Jun 2017 Source: Regina Leader-Post [edited] Due to a shortage of yellow fever vaccine across North America, Saskatchewan clinics will be providing partial doses of the vaccine to residents travelling to affected areas. Full doses will be made available only if residents are travelling to a country where there is a current outbreak of yellow fever; or if they will be living for more than a year in a country where the risk of contracting the disease is high; or if they are travelling to a country where they might be at high risk and they require an international Certificate of Vaccination or prophylaxis for entry and/or visa requirements. The criteria are subject to change at any time depending on availability of the vaccine. A partial dose of the vaccine will be provided to those who do not meet the criteria for a full dose. When a vial of yellow fever vaccine has been opened, it must be used within an hour. Therefore, people requiring a partial dose might have to make 2 visits to their travel clinic. On the 1st visit, they will receive a travel health assessment and the 2nd to receive the vaccine. This will help ensure no part of the vaccine is wasted. In Saskatchewan, yellow fever vaccine is only available through travel clinics in Saskatoon, Regina and Prince Albert. Some clinics in Alberta, Manitoba and British Columbia have already moved to offering partial doses of yellow fever vaccine to maximize the supply. The vaccine shortage could extend until 2018. Anyone who has received the yellow fever vaccine in the past is considered protected for life. It is important to find and keep the vaccination documents for border proof. The risk of transmission of yellow fever does not necessarily occur throughout a country. This is important to consider when planning travel to countries, such as Brazil, where the risk of the disease is present. If you have not booked your travel, determine whether yellow fever vaccination is required for your trip. You can access this information from the Public Health Agency of Canada website:  . [Byline: Pamela Cowan] -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts [The public and the clinics that serve them in the USA have already been notified about the impending yellow fever vaccine shortage that is expected to hit in mid-2017 (see ProMED-mail archive Yellow fever - Americas (42): USA vaccine http://promedmail.org/post/20170428.5002436). Several Canadian provincial travel clinics have already taken steps to extend the vaccine availability by providing partial doses of the vaccine. The volume of the partial dose is not mentioned. Partial doses (dose-sparing) of 1/5th the normal dose were given during the YF outbreak in the DR Congo after the outbreak in Angola spilled over there. Supplies of the vaccine were inadequate to provide full-dose coverage of the population at risk at that time. The limited literature available about dose-sparing vaccination indicates the protection is provided for at least a year. - Mod.TY A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map showing the location of Saskatehewan can be accessed at: .] [", "CONJUNCTIVITIS - AMERICAS: UPDATE ********************************* A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Fri 16 Jun 2017 Source: PAHO / WHO Epidemiological update, Conjunctivitis [edited] Summary of the situation in the Americas ---------------------------------------- As of epidemiological week (EW) 23 of 2017 [week ending 10 Jun 2017], 5 countries and territories of the Americas have reported outbreaks of conjunctivitis: Bahamas, Brazil, the Dominican Republic, Guadeloupe, and Martinique. 1. In the Bahamas, between May and June 2017, there was an increase in the number of cases of conjunctivitis. A total of 240 cases were reported compared to the 187 cases reported during the same period in 2016. Public health measures needed to control the situation have been implemented by the competent health authorities. 2. In Brazil, an outbreak of conjunctivitis was reported in the municipality of Humaita, Amazonas state, with 172 cases being registered between 18 May and 6 June 2017. Local health authorities are implementing prevention and control measures to end the outbreak. 3. In the Dominican Republic, as of EW 21 of 2017 [week ending 27 May 2017], a total of 66 626 cases of conjunctivitis were reported, representing a 62 percent increase compared with the same period of 2016 (41 022 reported cases). The conjunctivitis outbreak began on EW 18 of 2017 [week ending 6 May 2017] and is ongoing. Between EW 18 and EW 21, the provinces of Distrito Nacional, San Cristobal, Santiago, and Santo Domingo reported the highest increases in the number of cases. 4. In Guadeloupe, an increase in cases of conjunctivitis above the epidemic threshold level has been observed since the end of 2016. Between EW 20 [week ending 20 May 2017], and EW 21 of 2017 [week ending 27 May 2017], the weekly number of suspected cases increased significantly, with 500 to 600 cases being reported and a cumulative incidence of 20 cases for 10 000 population (8 times higher than the number of cases expected for this time of the year). Across the territory, the commune of Grand Bourg reported the highest incidence, with 353 cases per 10 000 population, followed by Le Gosier, Pointe-a-Pitre, and Terre-de-Bas, with an incidence between 50 and 100 cases per 10 000 population. Laboratory tests performed on a set of samples from suspected cases were positive for enteroviruses. 5. In Martinique, the number of cases of conjunctivitis increased significantly in EW 20 of 2017 [week ending 20 May 2017], when 250 suspected cases were reported weekly. Between EW 20 and EW 21 [week ending 27 May 2017], the cumulative incidence was 10 cases per 10 000 population. The communes of Marin and Fran\u00e7ois reported the highest incidence rates with 41 and 35 cases per 10 000 population, respectively. Outbreaks of conjunctivitis in other countries of the Region are under investigation. Recommendations --------------- In light of the increased transmission of conjunctivitis in some countries and territories of the Region, the Pan American Health Organization / World Health Organization (PAHO / WHO) encourages Member states to strengthen surveillance and implement control measures to prevent the spread of the disease. The following are the main recommendations related to surveillance, prevention, and management of contacts and treatment of patients. Surveillance and epidemiological investigation - Enhance surveillance for the timely detection of outbreaks, to adequately guide control measures. - Promptly notify health authorities on the detection of an outbreak. - Investigate contacts and sources of infection, and determine if there has been a common source of infection. - Strengthen laboratory capacity for confirmation of diagnosis. - Disseminate information and recommendations to health care workers. Prevention, management of contacts and immediate environment - Promote hand washing as well as meticulous cleaning and handling of any object that may come into contact with eye or respiratory secretions. - Ensure the cleanliness of conjunctival exudates. - Conduct health education campaigns for cases and contacts in order to avoid overcrowding and promote hygienic measures; instruct on the need to avoid touching eyes with hands or any object, and to frequently wash hands. Patients should not share any utensils and personal belongings with the rest of their families. - Properly chlorinate pools. - Organize diagnostic and case management services. - Ensure adherence to asepsis and antisepsis standards in health care settings. For health care workers - Always wear gloves and gowns for patient care and use personal protective measures. - Wash hands after providing care to an individual with probable or laboratory confirmed conjunctivitis. - Disinfect furniture and medical equipment to avoid contamination of other patients and / or staff. Case management --------------- - The management of conjunctivitis is symptomatic and should be limited to general measures, such as cold compresses and artificial tears with vasoconstrictors. - Antimicrobial agents should not be indicated, unless there is an aggregated microbial infection. The effectiveness of antivirals has also not been documented. - Steroidal anti-inflammatory medications should not be used as they significantly increase viral replication. Eye drops containing antibiotics should not be used. - Isolation should be used to limit contact with cases during the active period of the disease; take precautions regarding exudates and secretions. Restrict contact with cases while the disease is active. References ---------- 1. The Bahamas Ministry of Health. Conjunctivitis \"Pinkeye\" - 13 June 2017. Available at:  . 2. Information provided by the Brazil Ministry of Health by email to PAHO/WHO. 3. Cire Antilles Guyane. Epid\u00e9mie de conjonctivites virales aux Antilles. Point au 31 mai 2017. Available at:  . 4. Ministerio de Salud P\u00fablica de la Rep\u00fablica Dominicana. Bolet\u00edn Epidemiol\u00f3gico Semanal; semana epidemiol\u00f3gica 21. Available at:  . 5. Heymann, D. American Public Health Association. Control of Communicable Diseases Manual (20th ed.) 2015. -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail Rapporteur Marianne Hopp [In the above update, enteroviruses have been confirmed as the cause of the outbreak in Guadeloupe, while the etiology for the other countries/territories is under investigation. Given the scale of these outbreaks, it is more likely to be viral . Therefore, the best recourse would be emphasis on improved public awareness for prevention and control measures. - Mod.UBA A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  .] [", "JAPANESE ENCEPHALITIS AND OTHER - INDIA (05): (ODISHA) ****************************************************** A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Mon 19 Jun 2017 Source: New India Express [edited] Acute encephalitis syndrome (AES) has come back to haunt the state health administration. It has affected 313 persons, mostly children, and claimed 10 lives in Odisha till the end of May this year [2017]. While 3 deaths have been reported from Khurda district and 2 from Balasore, one each has died in Kendrapara, Jajpur, Nayagarh, Puri and Sambalpur. As per the statistics available from the directorate of the National Vector Borne Disease Control Programme (NVBDCP), no deaths have been reported from Japanese encephalitis (JE); though 313 AES cases have been diagnosed so far, 2 have been found to be JE positive. Odisha is, in fact, the 4th state -- after Uttar Pradesh, West Bengal and Assam -- which has recorded the maximum number of deaths due to AES. Uttar Pradesh has registered the highest number, 56 deaths, followed by 49 in WB and 32 in Assam. Though Tamil Nadu has registered the highest at 401 cases, no deaths have been reported in the southern state this year [2017]. Joint Director of Health Services (NVBDCP) Dr MM Pradhan said AES is a growing concern in the country, as it is a clinical neurologic manifestation caused by a wide range of viruses, bacteria, fungi, parasites, spirochetes, chemicals and toxins. \"Management of AES including JE is essentially symptomatic. It is important to identify early warning signs and refer patients to health facilities for treatment to reduce morbidity and mortality. Health workers have been educated for 1st line management of such cases at the grassroots level,\" he said. There are many AES-causing viruses for which neither vaccines nor medicines are available. In many cases, people affected with AES suffer from brain aspiration [meaning unclear - Mod.JH] and edema, which develop as a result of an inflammatory reaction in brain. It is difficult to survive if such cases are not treated early. The Health Department has alerted people to remain cautious, as early detection and treatment are 2 possible methods to put a check on AES. \"Since there is no particular medicine for the disease, we are adopting symptomatic treatment. Awareness activities have also been increased and health workers deployed at the periphery to spread awareness,\" Dr Pradhan said. After the spurt in AES and JE cases last year [2016], 10 sentinel laboratories were set up in the state for immediate diagnosis of blood samples. These laboratories have been provided with JE kits supplied by the Pune-based National Institute of Virology. The Health authorities have also planned to train all treating paediatric specialists to deal with encephalitis cases. They will be imparted training at AIIMS next month [June 2017]. Last year [2016], out of 1096 AES cases, 115 persons died of AES, and 42 children died of JE. Most of the cases were reported from Malkangiri district. Along with Malkangiri, mass vaccination was carried out in Mayurbhanj, Keonjhar and Jajpur districts in campaign mode. The state government has written to the Centre for Vaccination in the rest of the 13 districts that have reported AES cases in the past. [Byline: Hemant Kumar Rout] -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail [The JE virus transmission season is beginning in northeastern India. Odisha state is endemic for Japanese encephalitis (JE) virus, and cases occur there frequently. As with cases of encephalitis mentioned above and in other states in northeastern India, not all encephalitis cases are due to JE virus and are classified as acute encephalitis syndrome (AES) with undetermined etiology. AES is a term used for multiple etiologies or often when no etiology has been determined. As mentioned in many previous comments, the encephalitis picture in northeastern India is complicated. Although JE virus etiology of some previously reported encephalitis cases has been confirmed by laboratory tests, many cases go undiagnosed, or JE virus infection is ruled out, and other etiologies, including Reye syndrome-like disease, possible enterovirus infection from polluted water, heat stroke, scrub typhus ( _O. tsutsugamushi_) and lychee fruit consumption, have been proposed. Getting to an accurate diagnosis in these cases of AES will require active field surveillance with epidemiological studies supported by timely laboratory testing. Maps of India can be accessed at  and for Odisha state at . - Mod.TY] [", "MENINGITIS - ROMANIA: (BRASOV) BACTERIAL, REQUEST FOR INFORMATION ***************************************************************** A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Mon 19 Jun 2017 Source: Romania Insider [edited] A 17-year-old Romanian student diagnosed with bacterial meningitis died last week [15 Jun 2017] at the Pediatric Hospital in Brasov, central Romania, while 18 other teenagers were hospitalized with similar symptoms. The classmates of the young Romanian who died on [15 Jun 2017], as well as other people he came into contact with, were sent to the doctor for consultations. Their number reached 200 by [18 Jun 2017], reports local News.ro. Moreover, 18 young people were admitted to the Hospital for Infectious Diseases in Brasov, on suspicion of meningitis. One of them was diagnosed with this disease. Meanwhile, the authorities disinfected the high school where the young boy was a student, as well as the Pediatric Hospital, which doesn't have a department for infectious diseases. The 17-year-old student who died last week [15 Jun 2017] was from the Tarlungeni commune, in Brasov county. He and his friends had attended a party in the Purcareni village [Brasov county] tone week before. The students started to feel bad after this party. Meningitis is an inflammation (swelling) of the protective membranes covering the brain and spinal cord. A bacterial or viral infection of the fluid surrounding the brain and spinal cord usually causes the swelling. However, injuries, cancer, certain drugs, and other types of infections can also cause meningitis, according to information posted on the website of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Meningitis symptoms include sudden onset of fever, headache, and stiff neck, but there are also other symptoms such as nausea, vomiting, photophobia (increased sensitivity to light), and altered mental status (confusion). [Byline: Irina Marica] -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts [The news report above says that one teenage boy has died of bacterial meningitis and 18 of his friends were hospitalized with suspected meningitis; this diagnosis was subsequently confirmed in one. However, the bacterial species that caused the disease is not specified. Acute bacterial meningitis is a rapidly progressive disease. In a patient with suspected acute bacterial meningitis, blood and cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) cultures will indicate the causative organism and its antibiotic susceptibilities. An empiric intravenous antibiotic regimen that has a spectrum broad enough to cover the most likely bacterial pathogens is started as quickly as possible until the specific bacterial etiology is known. It is vital to begin treatment as early as possible in the course of the disease, as delay may contribute significantly to morbidity and mortality. Adjunctive dexamethasone is also given before or with the 1st antibiotic dose. Once a pathogen is known, the antibiotic regimen can be tailored to the antibiotic susceptibilities of the pathogen. Common causes of bacterial meningitis vary by age group. Outbreaks of meningitis in the community are often due to _Neisseria meningitidis_. More information on this outbreak would be appreciated from knowledgeable sources. Brasov is a city with a population of 253 200 residents in Romania and the administrative centre of Brasov County ( ). Tarlungeni is a commune with a population of 7820 residents in Brasov County; it is composed of 4 villages: Carpinis, Purcareni, Tarlungeni and Zizin ( ). A map showing the location of Tarlungeni can be found at  . A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map of Romania can be accessed at  . - Mod.ML] [", "JAPANESE ENCEPHALITIS - TAIWAN (02): (PINGTUNG) ************************************************ A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Mon 19 Jun 2017 17:51:14 CST Source: Focus Taiwan New Chanel, Central News Agency (CNA) report [edited] A woman from the southern Taiwan county of Pingtung, has been confirmed as having contracted Japanese encephalitis, making her the 4th person to be infected with the mosquito-borne disease in Taiwan this year [2017], the Centers for Disease Control (CDC) said on [Mon 19 Jun 2017]. The 53-year-old patient sought medical treatment at a local hospital on [26 May 2017], after developing a fever, fainting, and symptoms of consciousness disturbance, said CDC Deputy Director-General Chuang Jen-hsiang. Because the symptoms persisted, the woman was transferred to another hospital for further treatment, Chuang added, noting that the case was then reported to the local health authority as suspected Japanese encephalitis and specimens submitted for laboratory testing. The diagnosis was confirmed on [Sun 18 Jun 2017]. Chuang said that after conducting an epidemiological investigation, the CDC found the patient had not recently traveled overseas, nor been vaccinated against Japanese encephalitis. Instead, she spent most of her time at home. However, it was also noted that there is a pigeon and poultry farm approximately 2 km from the patient's residence, he said, adding that currently none of the family members with whom she cohabits have experienced any symptoms. Measures have been taken to prevent the further spread of the disease, including installing mosquito lamps around the residence of the patient and the places she frequents in an attempt to eliminate vector mosquitoes, according to the CDC. So far this year [2017], 4 cases of Japanese encephalitis have been confirmed in the country, including 2 in Kaohsiung and 1 in Tainan, CDC data show. Last year [2016], a total of 23 confirmed cases were recorded around Taiwan, fewer than the 30 cases in 2015, but more than 18 in 2014 and 16 in 2013, the data indicate. In addition, CDC data suggest that transmission of Japanese encephalitis in Taiwan mainly occurs annually between May and October and usually peaks between June and July. The agency notes that vaccination is the most effective way to prevent the disease. As the primary vector, the _Culex tritaeniorhynchus_ mosquito, is known to breed in paddy fields, ponds, and irrigation canals. People are advised to avoid visiting those places at dawn and dusk when mosquitoes are most active. People suffering from Japanese encephalitis can experience serious psychological or neurological symptoms with a mortality rate as high as 20-30 percent, according to the CDC. [Byline: Chang Ming-hsuan, Elizabeth Hsu] -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail [As noted in the comment in the previous post, the Japanese encephalitis (JE) virus transmission season in Taiwan has begun. JE virus is endemic in Taiwan and has caused cases sporadically there during the May-October season. _Culex_ mosquitoes are abundant enough there to accomplish transmission of the virus from birds and swine to people. Japanese encephalitis is a vaccine-preventable disease; the affected individual above had not been vaccinated. The only measures to prevent infection are vaccination and avoidance of mosquito bites. Maps of Taiwan can be seen at  and  . - Mod.TY] [", "INVASIVE MOSQUITO - USA (03): (CALIFORNIA) ****************************************** A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Mon 19 Jun 2017 Source: City of Long Beach Public Information Office [edited] Health Department Detects Mosquitoes with Potential to Transmit Zika in Long Beach -------------------------------------------------------------------------------- The Long Beach Department of Health and Human Services (DHHS) Vector Control Program has detected _Aedes aegypti_, the type of mosquito that can transmit Zika, dengue, and other viruses, for the 1st time in Long Beach. While they have been found in several surrounding cities in Southern California, this marks the 1st detection of these mosquitoes in Long Beach. \"We are actively informing and encouraging residents and visitors to take necessary precautions to prevent mosquito bites,\" said Mayor Robert Garcia. \"I'm proud of the outreach the Long Beach Department of Health and Human Services is conducting across our diverse communities.\" The _Aedes aegypti_ mosquitoes were found in North Long Beach, where mosquito control is under the jurisdiction of the Compton Creek Mosquito Abatement District (CMAD). Long Beach Vector Control is working with the CMAD to evaluate the extent of the infestation and aggressively target problem areas to prevent the spread of these mosquitoes. They have deployed a variety of traps for adult mosquitoes and mosquito eggs surrounding the location where the mosquitoes were found and additional locations where they may be found. \"Our goal is to control this mosquito population,\" said Dr. Anissa Davis, City Health Officer. \"We are doing everything to ensure this mosquito does not become established or thrive in our communities.\" Zika virus is transmitted through the bite of an infected _Aedes_ mosquito, but can also be transmitted through sexual contact and from a pregnant mother to her baby. Detecting the mosquitoes early on, before there is local transmission of the disease, will help to prevent Zika [virus] from being introduced into the community. There is currently no local transmission of Zika [virus] in California. DHHS outreach workers are distributing educational materials to residents in the area where the mosquitoes were found, and will work with residents to identify and eliminate breeding grounds around the home. Long Beach residents can play a critical role in helping to control the spread of this mosquito population. _Aedes aegypti_ is a small (approximately a quarter inch), aggressive, black and white mosquito that distinctly bites during the daytime. _Aedes aegypti_ can lay eggs just above the water line on the sides of small containers and vessels that hold water, such as dishes under potted plants, bird baths, ornamental fountains, tin cans, or discarded tires. The following precautions will help reduce the chances of being bitten by mosquitoes: - Empty any containers filled with water once a week - Clean and scrub bird baths and pet water bowls - Dump water from potted plant saucers - Check rain gutters and lawn drains to ensure they are not holding water and debris - Use mosquito repellent consistently when outside - Wear long sleeves and pants when outdoors - Ensure screens on doors and windows are in good repair Residents are urged to report unusual numbers of mosquitoes, or day-biting mosquitoes, to the City's Zika Hotline at (562) 570-7907. If you are sick with fever, headache, and joint or muscle pain after returning from an area where Zika, dengue, or chikungunya [virus transmission] occurs, contact your doctor and stay indoors as much as possible to avoid mosquito bites and help prevent possible spread of the virus in Long Beach. -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail [Finding _Aedes aegypti_ in Long Beach is not surprising. Both _Aedes aegypti_ and _Ae. albopictus_ have been found in various locations in California over the past 13 years (see archives listed below). Both of them have been detected in Southern California in several new locations over the past 1-3 years. Fortunately, few individuals have been trapped, indicating very small populations that are probably too limited to initiate and sustain ongoing Zika, chikungunya or dengue virus transmission. Air conditioning and screened windows and doors will help limit their abundance. However, the introduction of these viruses into Southern California will continue, so aggressive vector surveillance and control will be important to limit populations of these vectors. The state of California can be located on the HealthMap/ProMED-mail interactive map at . Long Beach is in Los Angeles County. A county map can be seen at  . - Mod.TY] [", "CHOLERA, DIARRHEA AND DYSENTERY UPDATE (57): AFRICA, ASIA, AMERICAS ******************************************************************* A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases In this update: Africa [1] Cholera - Horn of Africa [2] Cholera - Somalia [3] Cholera - Kenya (Nakuru County) Asia [4] Diarrhea, fatal - Philippines (Lanao del Sur Province) Americas [5] V. cholerae bacteremia - Jamaica ****** [1] Cholera - Horn of Africa Date: Fri 16 Jun 2017 Source: UN Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA), ReliefWeb [edited] Horn of Africa: humanitarian impacts of drought ----------------------------------------------- Rainfall -------- Somalia: The significant reduction of rainfall across Somalia in the 1st week of June 2017 marks a possible end to the Gu rainy season. The reduction of rainfall within the Juba and Shabelle River basins in Ethiopia and Somalia has led to decreasing river levels which are expected to stabilize in the coming week. Ethiopia: In May 2017, rainfall levels in excess of 125 percent of the long-term average were recorded in northern and eastern Ethiopia. Less than 75 percent of the long-term average rainfall was observed around southern Ethiopia, while below normal rainfall distribution was observed over SNNPR [Southern Nations, Nationalities, and Peoples' Region]. Rainfall forecasts indicate that rainfall is likely to continue during the 1st dekad (10 days) of June 2017 over much of western and central Ethiopia. Kenya: Poorly distributed, erratic, and depressed rainfall was recorded over most of Kenya except for coastal areas where enhanced rainfall exceeding 125 percent of the long-term mean for May 2017. Most parts of the country are expected to remain generally dry in June 2017, except for western and coastal areas which will continue to receive significant amounts of rainfall. Displacement ------------ Somalia: According to the UNHCR-led Protection and Return Monitoring Network, an estimated 738 600 people have been displaced by drought between November 2016 and May 2017. Of these, nearly 46 000 were displaced in May 2017, a significant decrease in new drought-related displacements compared to previous months. The majority of the newly displaced are from Sanaag (12 570), Lower Shabelle (7200), Bakool (6680), Bay (6250), Sool (3860), and Nugal (3100). Baidoa (160 700) and Mogadishu (160 460) host 42 percent of these displaced people. Reports indicate that people are opting to remain in their areas of origin to cultivate their farms and that the rains have made some roads impassable. Ethiopia: There are 843 367 internally displaced people, more than half of them in the Somali region. In 2017, 220 000 people have been displaced by drought. Gambella town experienced flash floods due to heavy rains in mid-May 2017 and 2395 people were displaced. Kenya: 39 000 people remain displaced due to conflict over resources, insecurity and drought. Disease ------- Somalia is experiencing its largest outbreak of cholera in 5 years, with 48 607 cases and 763 deaths reported in 48 districts since January 2017. In Ethiopia, 35 665 acute watery diarrhoea [AWD] cases and 780 deaths (CFR [case fatality rate] 2.2 percent) have been reported in 6 regions since January 2017. The Somali region accounts for more than 91 percent of cases and 96 percent of deaths but the AWD situation has improved with an 88 percent decrease in cases from early April 2017 to the end of May 2017. In Kenya, 303 suspected cases of cholera and 3 deaths have been reported since January 2017. -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail ****** [2] Cholera - Somalia Date: Sat 17 Jun 2017 Source: UN Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA), ReliefWeb, WHO, Somali Federal Republic Ministry of Health report [edited] Situation report for acute watery diarrhoea/cholera epidemiological week 23 (5-11 Jun 2017) ---------------------------------------------------------------------- The overall trend shows that the AWD/cholera outbreak is not slowing down. The outbreak is spreading to new villages and districts. There are cholera alerts being reported from Galgadud, Gedo, Togdheer, Bakol, Middle Juba regions, and other inaccessible areas. Verification of these alerts is difficult due to insecurity. The severe drought and its consequences (including water scarcity, food insecurity and malnutrition) are major contributing factors to the ongoing cholera outbreak. More AWD/cholera cases were recorded among people living in IDP [internally displaced persons] camps due to worsening drought in Baidoa, Banadir, and other districts. Response preparations for another cholera outbreak along the main rivers are ongoing since the rainy season has began and major floods are expected. Active transmission of AWD/cholera is ongoing in all districts in Banadir region. 2429 AWD/cholera cases and 19 deaths (CFR 0.8 percent) were reported during week 23 from 48 districts in 16 regions. Of these cases, 460 were reported from Wadajir district in Banadir. A cumulative 51 036 suspected AWD/cholera cases and 782 deaths (CFR-1.5 percent) have been recorded from 48 districts across 16 regions since the beginning of 2017. The trend of cholera cases recorded in the past 23 weeks shows a significant increase when compared to cases reported during the same period in 2016. The current AWD/cholera cases were a spill-over from 2016's major outbreak, which recorded 15 619 cases and 548 deaths. Breakdown of AWD/cholera cases by region ---------------------------------------- - Bay: a total of 81 cases and no deaths were recorded during week 23. There has been a significant reduction in the number of cases during the past 2 weeks. - Banadir: 460 cases and 11 deaths were recorded across 15 districts in the region. The number of reported cases decreased during the week. - Lower Shebelle: 201 cases and 2 deaths were recorded during week 23. - Middle Shebelle: a total of 63 cases and no death was recorded during the reporting period. - Lower Jubba: 178 cases and 3 deaths were recorded during week 23. - Hiran: 7 AWD/cholera cases were reported this week. - Bakool: 60 cases and no death were recorded during week 23. The number of cases has decreased over the past 2 weeks. - Gedo: a total of 144 cases and no death were recorded in week 23. - Galgadud: 331 cases and no death were recorded during the reporting week. Most of the cases were reported from Abdiwaq and Dusomareb which are experiencing civil conflict and are not accessible. - Bari: a total of 29 AWD/cholera cases and no deaths were reported during the reporting period. - Mudug: 205 cases and 1 deaths were reported in week 23. - Nugaal: a total of 182 AWD/cholera cases and zero deaths were reported during week 23. - Ayn: 127 cases and no death were reported in week 23. Reports have been received that these cases are being imported into Puntland from Ethiopia. - Sanaag: 127 cases and 1 death were reported during the reporting week. - Karkaar: a total of 149 cases and no death were reported in week 23. - Sool: 85 cases and 1 death were recorded during the reporting week. -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail [Maps of Somalia can be seen at  and  . - Sr.Tech.Ed.MJ] ****** [3] Cholera - Kenya (Nakuru County) Date: Fri 16 Jun 2017 Source: Mediamax Network [edited] A middle aged man, a second victim of the deadly cholera, is admitted at the Naivasha sub-county [Nakuru County] hospital in serious condition. The 1st case was detected 2 weeks ago when another male patient was diagnosed with cholera forcing the county health department to activate its outbreak response. The suspected cholera outbreak has caused panic in the areas where healthcare services have been adversely affected by the ongoing nurses' strike over delayed implementation of their Collective Bargaining Agreement (CBA). There are fears that a full-blown outbreak could overwhelm the skeleton staff at the health facilities. The new case has raised concern among medics that the cholera bacterium could be active and more patients could be suffering from the disease. The Naivasha sub-county hospital superintendent, Dr Joseph Mburu, said the patient who lives in Kabati estate was responding well to treatment. He said the man who lived alone could have picked the bacteria in county council estate where the first case was reported. Mburu said despite the few number of nurses in the facility, they were doing everything possible to contain the outbreak and deal with any new cases. \"We are working with officers from the Department of Public Health in sensitising members of the public and schools as one way of addressing these cases,\" he said. He, at the same time, added that the number of patients seeking services at the hospital had continued to drop due to the ongoing strike. Mburu said the male ward has since been closed down adding that they were only admitting emergency cases in the facility. \"We have been forced in some cases mainly in the maternity wing to refer patients to other hospitals as the current number of nurses cannot cope with the workload,\" he said. Mburu added that all they were currently using the few nurses employed by the county government on contract adding that they were only addressing emergency cases. \"We have over 90 nurses employed by the government who are on strike and we are currently relying on the 42 who are on contract,\" he said. [Byline: Kirera Mwiti] -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail [Maps of Kenya can be seen at and  . Naivasha is a market town in Nakuru County, Kenya, lying north west of Nairobi. - Mod.LL] ****** [4] Diarrhea, fatal - Philippines (Lanao del Sur Province) Date: Tue 20 Jun 2017 Source: Davao Today [summ., edited] A top health official in Lanao del Sur province confirmed on [Mon 19 Jun 2017] 2 cases of death among the evacuees in the area due to diarrhea. Dr Alinader Minalang, the provincial health officer of Lanao del Sur said more than 300 diarrhea cases were already recorded by their office since the displaced families and individuals from Marawi took temporary refuge in evacuation centers in the area. \"The record is based on the daily reports submitted to us,\" Minalang told reporters in an interview on [Mon 19 Jun 2017] morning here [in Iligan City, Lanao del Norte]. He said that of the 2 cases of death due to severe dehydration, one was recorded at the evacuation site in the town of Malabang while the other was in Saguiran municipality [Lanao del Sur]. The evacuees who died, he added were home-based. Another 2 cases of deaths due to diarrhea were recorded in the province but the victims were not evacuees, Minalang clarified. A total of 19 cases of deaths of evacuees have been reported but authorities clarified that the cause of deaths was due to different illnesses. 20 percent of the more than 200 000 displaced individuals from Marawi are now staying in various evacuation centers and are confronted with various problems such as congestion, sanitation, lack of enough water supply and food. 80 percent of the evacuees are considered home-based or staying with their relatives in towns, cities, and provinces in various parts of Mindanao. Minalang also denied reports of a case of cholera in one of the evacuation centers. \"We are still confirming the report. We cannot say there is cholera because most of those who are sick are due to acute gastroenteritis are still being subjected to laboratory examinations,\" he pointed out. There is still no basis to conclude that the cause of the increase of acute gastroenteritis cases is due to cholera, he added. He said that cases of acute gastroenteritis usually increase in evacuation centers where people are congested. \"The sanitation facilities in evacuation centers are not enough, especially the toilets and the lack of water supply that they need daily,\" he added. But despite the situation, Minalang said they are trying to address the situation to control the outbreak of acute gastroenteritis among the evacuees. Evacuees at the gymnasium in Balo-i, Lanao del Norte also deal with the problems of congestion and sanitation, said Nesphia Ali of the Department of Social Welfare and Development. The gymnasium presently houses 172 families or 1025 individuals. Acute gastroenteritis is also one of the common illnesses that the recently-concluded National Interfaith Humanitarian Mission found among the 343 patients served in various evacuation centers. The information office of the Autonomous Region in Muslim Mindanao said more toilets, bathing and washing facilities will be constructed in evacuation centers to promote hygiene and sanitation and ensure the health and well-being of displaced families. [Byline: Alex D Lopez] -- Communicated by: ProMED-MBDS [Maps of the Philippines can be seen at and . Lanao del Sur is a province in the Philippines located in the Autonomous Region in Muslim Mindanao. The Marawi crisis ( ) also known as the Marawi City siege and the Battle of Marawi, is an ongoing armed conflict in Marawi, Lanao del Sur, that started on 23 May 2017, between Philippine government security forces and affiliated militants of the Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant, including the Maute and Abu Sayyaf Salafi jihadist groups - Mod.LL] ****** [5] _V. cholerae_ bacteremia - Jamaica Date: Tue 20 Jun 2017 Source: Jamaica Information Service, Ministry of Health report [edited] The Ministry of Health is informing the public that currently there has been no confirmed case of cholera in Jamaica. The last known case of cholera in Jamaica occurred 150 years ago. Additionally, there is no increased reporting of gastroenteritis (GE) at our facilities. The reported cases of GE at this time are 30 percent less than recorded for the corresponding period in 2016. On 9 Jun 2017, the Ministry was notified of a patient presenting with abdominal pain and fever. Routine investigations identified a bacterium in the patient's blood. Based on the patient's presentation, this bacteria is not consistent with the _Vibrio cholerae_ species associated with severe diarrheal illness, commonly known as 'cholera'. The patient did not have diarrhea and contacts of that patient report no symptoms suggestive of cholera. A sample for confirmation has been sent for testing to CARPHA [Caribbean Public Health Agency] in Trinidad. No other patient is being investigated for cholera in our facilities. Since the reintroduction of cholera in the region in 2010, the Ministry of Health has heightened its surveillance of the disease. The Ministry also continues to bolster its health services to identify suspected cases of cholera and mitigate any potential effects on the population. -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail [Maps of Jamaica can be seen at  and  . Although not specifically stated, it is implied that the patient had a Vibrio-related bacteremia and that it was caused by a non-O1, non-O139 _V. cholerae_. Non-toxigenic _V. cholerae_ bacteremia certainly occurs albeit uncommonly: References ---------- - Marinello S, Marini G, Parisi G, et al: _Vibrio cholerae_ non-O1, non-O139 bacteraemia associated with pneumonia, Italy 2016. Infection. 2017; 45: 237-40; abstract available at  . - Fern\u00e1ndez-Ruiz M, Carretero O, Orellana M\u00c1: Bacteraemia due to non-toxigenic Vibrio cholerae: the risks of eating seafood in a cirrhotic patient. Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2017; 40(5): 358-60; available (in English and Spanish) at . - Engel MF, Muijsken MA, Mooi-Kokenberg E, et al: _Vibrio cholerae_ non-O1 bacteraemia: description of three cases in the Netherlands and a literature review. Euro Surveill. 2016; 21(15). doi: 10.2807/1560-7917.ES.2016.21.15.30197; available at  . - Mod.LL] [", "SNAKE FUNGAL DISEASE - EUROPE: (UNITED KINGDOM, CZECH REPUBLIC) FIRST REPORT **************************************************************************** A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Mon 19 Jun 2017, 00:00 Source: Express [edited] National Geographic warned last week [12 - 18 Jun 2017] that the spread of the disease through serpent species, including America's iconic rattlesnakes, is potentially disastrous as the reptiles keep vermin such as rats and mice in check. News of SFD [Snake fungal disease] cases in the UK was announced today [19 Jun 2017] 24 hours after BBC's Countryfile screened a special report on conservation efforts being made to save the nation's remaining 100 000 adders. There are an estimated 300 000 grass snakes across Britain but there are serious conservation concerns and the species has protection under the Wildlife and Countryside Act as well as being a priority creature under the UK Biodiversity Action Plan. The discovery of domestic snake with SFD will only heighten conservation concerns. Details of the disease's presence in the UK and Europe were announced today in a new collaborative study led by the Zoological Society of London and published in the journal, Scientific Reports. SFD is caused by a fungus called _Ophidiomyces ophiodiicola_ and, prior to the study, had only been found in central and eastern USA, but an analysis of samples collected from wild snakes in the United Kingdom and the Czech Republic between 2010-2016 has confirmed the presence of the pathogen. Scientists say that although the disease poses no known risk to humans or livestock, further research is vital. Lead author and wildlife veterinarian Dr Lydia Franklinos said: \"Our team at ZSL found evidence of SFD in grass snakes from the UK and a single dice snake from the Czech Republic. The analysis found that the fungus strains from Europe are different to those previously identified in North America - suggesting that rather than being introduced across the Atlantic, or vice versa, the disease could have been present below the radar in European snakes for some time.\" \"Of all terrestrial vertebrate wildlife, we probably know least about health conditions that affect reptiles such as snakes, so this study represents an important milestone and one that will hopefully encourage greater focus in understanding the threats facing these animals.\" Fellow author Dr Jeffrey Lorch, a microbiologist with the USGS National Wildlife Health Center explained why it is essential to find out more about the disease. He said: \"The fungus that causes SFD is already known to occur across the eastern half of the U.S. and infect over 20 species of snakes. Comparing how SFD affects wild snakes on different continents may help us pinpoint the factors causing the disease to emerge and help managers identify mitigation strategies.\" Fungal diseases have already proven catastrophic to wildlife. Bats and amphibians have been stricken by the pathogens, with reports one strain was being spread by turning frogs into \"sex zombies\". The pathogen has been making the mating calls of infected males more attractive to females so they can pick up and perpetuate the disease. [Byline: Stuart Winter] -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts [The article referred to can be accessed at  . Snake fungal disease (SFD) is an emerging disease of wild snakes that had been circumscribed to North America. This report shows that the fungus is also present in Europe. It is noteworthy that the study not only found the fungus, but also skin lesions associated with infection. In some cases, these lesions were severe enough to be considered the likely cause of death. A picture of the lesions observed in snakes with SFD can be seen at  . - Mod.PMB A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  ,  .] [", "INVASIVE MOSQUITO - USA (03): (CALIFORNIA) ****************************************** A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Mon 19 Jun 2017 Source: City of Long Beach Public Information Office [edited] Health Department Detects Mosquitoes with Potential to Transmit Zika in Long Beach -------------------------------------------------------------------------------- The Long Beach Department of Health and Human Services (DHHS) Vector Control Program has detected _Aedes aegypti_, the type of mosquito that can transmit Zika, dengue, and other viruses, for the 1st time in Long Beach. While they have been found in several surrounding cities in Southern California, this marks the 1st detection of these mosquitoes in Long Beach. \"We are actively informing and encouraging residents and visitors to take necessary precautions to prevent mosquito bites,\" said Mayor Robert Garcia. \"I'm proud of the outreach the Long Beach Department of Health and Human Services is conducting across our diverse communities.\" The _Aedes aegypti_ mosquitoes were found in North Long Beach, where mosquito control is under the jurisdiction of the Compton Creek Mosquito Abatement District (CMAD). Long Beach Vector Control is working with the CMAD to evaluate the extent of the infestation and aggressively target problem areas to prevent the spread of these mosquitoes. They have deployed a variety of traps for adult mosquitoes and mosquito eggs surrounding the location where the mosquitoes were found and additional locations where they may be found. \"Our goal is to control this mosquito population,\" said Dr. Anissa Davis, City Health Officer. \"We are doing everything to ensure this mosquito does not become established or thrive in our communities.\" Zika virus is transmitted through the bite of an infected _Aedes_ mosquito, but can also be transmitted through sexual contact and from a pregnant mother to her baby. Detecting the mosquitoes early on, before there is local transmission of the disease, will help to prevent Zika [virus] from being introduced into the community. There is currently no local transmission of Zika [virus] in California. DHHS outreach workers are distributing educational materials to residents in the area where the mosquitoes were found, and will work with residents to identify and eliminate breeding grounds around the home. Long Beach residents can play a critical role in helping to control the spread of this mosquito population. _Aedes aegypti_ is a small (approximately a quarter inch), aggressive, black and white mosquito that distinctly bites during the daytime. _Aedes aegypti_ can lay eggs just above the water line on the sides of small containers and vessels that hold water, such as dishes under potted plants, bird baths, ornamental fountains, tin cans, or discarded tires. The following precautions will help reduce the chances of being bitten by mosquitoes: - Empty any containers filled with water once a week - Clean and scrub bird baths and pet water bowls - Dump water from potted plant saucers - Check rain gutters and lawn drains to ensure they are not holding water and debris - Use mosquito repellent consistently when outside - Wear long sleeves and pants when outdoors - Ensure screens on doors and windows are in good repair Residents are urged to report unusual numbers of mosquitoes, or day-biting mosquitoes, to the City's Zika Hotline at (562) 570-7907. If you are sick with fever, headache, and joint or muscle pain after returning from an area where Zika, dengue, or chikungunya [virus transmission] occurs, contact your doctor and stay indoors as much as possible to avoid mosquito bites and help prevent possible spread of the virus in Long Beach. -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail [Finding _Aedes aegypti_ in Long Beach is not surprising. Both _Aedes aegypti_ and _Ae. albopictus_ have been found in various locations in California over the past 13 years (see archives listed below). Both of them have been detected in Southern California in several new locations over the past 1-3 years. Fortunately, few individuals have been trapped, indicating very small populations that are probably too limited to initiate and sustain ongoing Zika, chikungunya or dengue virus transmission. Air conditioning and screened windows and doors will help limit their abundance. However, the introduction of these viruses into Southern California will continue, so aggressive vector surveillance and control will be important to limit populations of these vectors. The state of California can be located on the HealthMap/ProMED-mail interactive map at . Long Beach is in Los Angeles County. A county map can be seen at  . - Mod.TY] [", "E. COLI EHEC - USA (12): (TEXAS) ******************************** A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Mon 19 Jun 2017 5:44 PM CDT Source: WFAA [edited] A 2-year-old boy is on life support at Children's Medical Center of Dallas [Texas] while investigators search for the source of the potentially deadly _E. coli_ bacterium that is ravaging the child's body. The boy and his parents returned to their home in Ennis [TX] after a trip to Oklahoma. Within days the young boy was suffering from stomach virus-type symptoms. A fecal test confirmed _E. coli_ and they quickly took him to Children's Medical Center Dallas. The most dangerous forms of _E. coli_ produce a Shiga toxin. In this case, it led to hemolytic uremic syndrome (HUS), the abnormal destruction of red blood cells which leads to kidney failure. 2 surgeries later the child is on life support with his parents hoping that this weekend [24-25 Jun 2017] he will finally be able to breathe on his own. \"We can't hold him. We can't love on him. All we can do is just stand at the bedside,\" said the boy's mom. What they don't know is where the bacteria came from. It is most commonly a foodborne infection. The bacterium is found in the intestines of cattle and other animals. Contaminated and undercooked ground beef is often a culprit: a major outbreak on the west coast of the USA in 1992-93 killed 4 children and sickened more than 800 when _E. coli_ contaminated beef was sold at multiple fast food chain locations. Fecal contamination of crops like sprouts and greens has killed scores of people too. Young children whose immune systems are not fully developed, and the elderly whose immune systems may be compromised, are most at risk. Surveys by the CDC estimate that 100 000 illnesses, 3000 hospitalizations, and 90 deaths a year in the USA are caused by Shiga toxin-producing _E. coli_ bacteria. \"Most parents like us had no idea you know the dangers of something like this. And it's everywhere. _E. coli_ is something that's everywhere,\" said the mother. Investigators will try to backtrack and find out where this _E. coli_ infection came from. Meanwhile his parents pray he survives his encounter with the potentially deadly bacterium. \"I have faith he's gonna come out on top,\" said his dad. The Texas Department of State Health Services confirms to WFAA that they are investigating this case and that they are the lead agency for the investigation. No additional details will be given because of confidentiality. So far there are no other related cases. [Byline: Kevin Reece] -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail [The case fatality rate for EHEC is usually below 10 percent. There is significant evidence that the administration of most antimicrobial agents early in EHEC disease may increase the risk of hemolytic uremic syndrome (HUS). Most fatalities are in individuals who develop central nervous system complications in HUS. Since CS Wong and colleagues reported a relative risk of the development of HUS in _E. coli_ O157 infection of 17.3 (95 percent confidence interval 2.2 to 137) (1), it has generally been thought that antimicrobial agents increase HUS risk. In this study, trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole and beta-lactam drugs were those most linked to HUS. Whether other antimicrobial agents would likewise be linked to HUS, whether the same effect would occur in adults, whether non-O157 strains would behave similarly and what the mechanism of the effect is are not clearly known. Overall, trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole (also referred to as co-trimoxazole) and fluoroquinolones seemed to be the prime offenders, both not uncommonly used empirically for perceived bacterial enteritis. As discussed in Kimmitt's paper in Emerging Infectious Diseases, the Shiga toxin genes reside on a lambda-like bacteriophage genome integrated into the bacterial chromosome (2). Different EHEC strains contain various numbers of these phages displaying much diversity and some beginning defective (3). In particular, fluoroquinolones induce high-level expression of previously silent bacteriophage genes with coexpression of the toxin genes. A number of studies have studied Shiga toxin production and/or release using a variety of antimicrobial agents at subinhibitory and/or suprainhibitory concentrations using a variety of markers for toxin. These include direct immunologic measurement, cytotoxicity assays, and enzyme reporters. It appears that imipenem (4) and rifaximin (5) do not induce toxin production or phage-mediated cell lysis, suggesting that these agents may not increase the risk of HUS and might be useful in management. TJ Ochoa and colleagues found that fluoroquinolones induced Shiga toxin induction much more commonly in O157 than non-O157 strains (5), but Lee and Stein did not (6). References ---------- 1. Wong CS, Jelacic S, Habeeb RL, et al. The risk of the hemolytic-uremic syndrome after antibiotic treatment of _Escherichia coli_ O157:H7 infections. N Engl J Med 2000; 342(26): 6; available at  . 2. Kimmitt PT, Harwood CR, Barer MR. Toxin gene expression by Shiga toxin-producing _Escherichia coli_: the role of antibiotics and the bacterial SOS response. Emerg Infect Dis. 2000; 6(5): 458-65; available at . 3. Hayashi T, Makino K, Ohnishi M, et al. Complete genome of sequence of enterohemorrhagic _Escherichia coli_ O157:H7 and genomic comparison with a laboratory strain K-12. DNA Res. 2001; 8(1): 11-22; available at . 4. Takahashi K, Narita K, Kato Y, et al. Low-level release of Shiga-like toxin (verocytotoxin) and endotoxin from enterohemorrhagic _Escherichia coli_ treated with imipenem. Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 1997; 41(10): 2295-6; available at  . 5. Ochoa TJ, Chen J, Walker CM, et al. Rifaximin does not induce toxin production or phage-mediated lysis of Shiga toxin-producing _Escherichia coli_. Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 2007; 51(8): 2837-41; available at  . 6. Lee JH, Stein BD. Antimicrobials effective for inhibition of enterohemorrhagic _Escherichia coli_ strains O26, O111, and O157 and their effects on Shiga toxin releases. J Microbiol Biotechnol 2009; 19(10): 1238-43; available at  . - Mod.LL A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  .] [", "JAPANESE ENCEPHALITIS - AUSTRALIA ex THAILAND (02): FATAL ********************************************************* A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Wed 21 Jun 2017 Source: ABC News [edited] An Australian man returned from Thailand has died from the rare but potentially fatal mosquito-borne disease, Japanese encephalitis. The Victorian man in his 60s had visited Phuket for 10 days in early May [2017] and became lethargic on day 8. After returning home, he struggled to stay awake and went to hospital a few days later in a confused state. His conscious state continued to diminish, and he was eventually admitted to the intensive care unit, where he died. Japanese encephalitis causes a brain infection that is fatal in about 20 to 30 percent of cases. But not all mosquitoes carry the virus, and the risk of catching it is \"vanishingly rare,\" according to Steven Tong, who treated the man at Royal Melbourne Hospital. \"We don't have Japanese encephalitis within Australia itself, so it has to be acquired during travel to areas of risk,\" he said. \"That depends on going to those areas and being exposed to mosquitos carrying the virus, being bitten by an infected mosquito, and then developing the disease. Most figures suggest that for travellers to endemic areas such as Thailand, the risk is probably in the order of one in a million to one in 500 000 travellers to those areas will get Japanese encephalitis. Unfortunately, this guy was just very, very unlucky.\" Doctors said the man had not been vaccinated and had not sought any pre-travel advice about the virus. Despite the virus' potentially fatal nature, Dr Tong said there was no risk the man's illness could endanger other Australians, because Japanese encephalitis [virus] breeds in aquatic birds not found in Australia, or pigs, before they can infect humans. \"People have such a short-lived duration of the virus in them that people are seen as a dead-end host,\" Dr Tong said. It is unclear how the man caught the disease. There were no reports he had contact with animals or travelled to rural regions in Thailand, but he reported multiple mosquito bites while in Thailand. The last known case of Japanese encephalitis in Australia was in 2015 when another Victorian man, aged 45, returned with the disease after a trip to Bali. Dr Tong said despite the rare nature of Japanese encephalitis, Australians travelling anywhere in Southeast Asia should take precautions, including vaccination and the use of insect repellent. \"Obviously, it's a devastating disease, so any prevention is helpful,\" he said. [Byline: Anne Barker] -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail [This is the same case posted on 3 Jun 2017. At that time, the patient was alive but on ventilatory support, obeyed commands at times, and had a flaccid paralysis. Subsequent to that report, the man died. As noted in that earlier report, Japanese encephalitis (JE) virus is endemic in Thailand, so the occurrence of this case, although unusual, is not surprising. The specific location where the patient acquired his JE virus infection in Thailand was Phuket, a very popular tourist destination. Visitors to rural areas in Thailand are well advised to take the precautions recommended by the US CDC ( ). Traveling to a tourist destination such as Phuket poses a dilemma for the tourist: to be vaccinated or not? The probability of acquiring a JE virus infection during a short-term visit is very low but not zero. The vaccine can be relatively expensive. JE vaccine is recommended for travelers who plan to spend one month or more in endemic areas during the JE virus transmission season. This includes long-term travelers, recurrent travelers, or expatriates who will be based in urban areas but are likely to visit endemic rural or agricultural areas during a high-risk period of JE virus transmission. Travelers should consult their travel clinics and at least be advised of measures to avoid mosquito bites. Apparently, this individual did not do that. Readers interested in clinical details of this case, provided in the previous post by Drs David Hamer and Karin Leder as well as Dr Shio Yen Tio, Dr Khai Lin Huang and Associate Professor Steven Tong, can see them at the archived report listed below. - Mod.TY. A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  .] [", "POLIOMYELITIS UPDATE (12): SYRIA (DEIR AL ZOUR, AR RAQQAH), SUSPECTED CASES *************************************************************************** A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases [1] Date: 20 Jun 2017 Source: NY Times [edited] At least 17 children in eastern Syria have been paralyzed from a recently confirmed outbreak of polio, the World Health Organization said Tuesday [20 Jun 2017], punctuating the health risks to a population ravaged by more than 6 years of war. It is the 2nd outbreak of the crippling disease to hit Syria since the war began, and largely reflected the inability of health workers to immunize all children caught in conflict zones where access is difficult and sanitation is poor. The polio virus, once thought to verge on eradication, is one of the most contagious diseases in inadequately protected areas. One confirmed case of paralysis is considered an outbreak, as doctors assume it means up to 200 other people may have been exposed to the virus. Tarik Jasarevic, a spokesman for the World Health Organization in Geneva, said there was an urgent need to vaccinate more than 400 000 children under the age of 5 in the Deir al-Zour area, where the outbreak was 1st confirmed in an announcement made by the organization on 8 Jun 2017. He described the outbreak as \"very serious.\" 16 of the paralyzed children were from Mayadin, south of Deir al-Zour, and one was from farther north in Raqqa, the Syrian redoubt of the Islamic State extremist group. The entire region has been upended by fighting. All of the children developed the paralysis between [3 Mar 2017 and 23 May 2017], Mr. Jasarevic said. Unlike Syria's 1st polio outbreak in 2013, caused by a wild strain that paralyzed 36 children before it was brought under control, the new outbreak is derived from the polio vaccine itself, Mr. Jasarevic said. The vaccine, a weakened form of the polio virus that triggers the immune system's response, is secreted in the waste of vaccinated children, and over time can mutate into an infectious strain that may afflict the unvaccinated. The risks are especially high in areas where not all children have received the vaccine and where the mutated virus can spread from contaminated sewage or water. \"These vaccine-derived outbreaks really are a marker of poor vaccination and poor sanitation in the community,\" said Dr. Homer Venters, director of programs at Physicians for Human Rights, an international aid group based in New York that supports humanitarian work in war zones, including Syria and Yemen. Along with a recent measles outbreak near Damascus, the Syrian capital, and a cholera scourge raging in war-torn Yemen, Dr. Venters said, the new polio outbreak \"is another indication that public health systems have been decimated by these conflicts.\" As of late March and April [2017], Mr. Jasarevic said, there had been some vaccinations in parts of the Deir al-Zour area, \"but security remained an issue, and that's why many children were not vaccinated.\" He also said it was unclear whether the afflicted child in Raqqa meant that the virus was circulating there or whether the child had traveled to Raqqa and then developed the case. [Byline: Rick Gladstone] -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail ****** [2] Date: 20 Jun 2017 Source: Reuters [edited] 15 new cases of polio have been confirmed in Syria, including a child who may have caught the disease in Raqqa, the World Health Organization said on Tuesday [20 Jun 2017]. Aid workers are unable to vaccinate the population in and around Raqqa, a city held by Islamic State militants and a target of U.S.-led airstrikes. The WHO reported 2 polio cases in an area of Syria partly held by the Islamic State earlier this month [June 2017, see prior ProMED posts below for details], the 1st reemergence of the virus in Syria since 2014 and a blow for hopes of eradicating the disease globally. WHO spokesman Tarik Jasarevic told a U.N. briefing on Tuesday [20 Jun 2017] that 14 more cases had been found in the same area, the Mayadin district of Deir al-Zour province, and another had come from Raqqa, a city where Islamic State fighters are trying to resist a U.S.-backed assault. \"We are very worried, because, obviously, if there is already one case of polio of a kid that is paralyzed, it's already an outbreak. We know, for example, that for one kid that is paralyzed, there are almost 200 asymptomatic, so it means that virus is circulating, so it is very serious,\" Jasarevic said. -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail Rapporteur Mary Marshall [In early May 2017, we posted on suspected cases of polio in Deir al Zour, Syria (see Poliomyelitis update (05): Syria (DY) susp, RFI http://promedmail.org/post/20170506.5015784). At that time, there were 15 suspected cases reported from the area. Shortly thereafter, a reliable source reported there were 23 identified AFP (acute flaccid paralysis cases, the syndrome that is used to identify suspected cases of polio) cases in that area (see Poliomyelitis update (06): Syria (DY), cVDPV susp http://promedmail.org/post/20170512.5032401) and that cVDPV (circulating vaccine derived poliovirus) was suspected to be the etiology of the paralytic polio cases. cVDPV was confirmed in 2 cases plus a 3rd asymptomatic contact of these cases in early June 2017 (see Poliomyelitis update (09): Syria (DY), conf. cVDPV http://promedmail.org/post/20170608.5093275), at which time, it was mentioned that there had been 58 AFP cases identified, with 11 having been ruled out as due to polio, but leaving 44 AFP cases still pending laboratory results. The above reports in today's [21 Jun 2017] update suggest that in total there have been 17 cases (it appears as though the NY Times article includes the 2 cases confirmed earlier this month [June 2017]). Remembering that there were 44 AFP cases still pending laboratory results as of last week, there still remain at least 29 AFP cases pending results, so additional cases confirmed in the coming days/weeks may not be a surprise. Of additional note is the identification of a case in Raqqa. While the location of transmission of the virus involved in this case is not at present known, (locally acquired in Raqqa with local circulation of the cVDPV2 in Raqqa vs. importation from Deir al Zour), the virus has now been introduced into a 2nd province of Syria - Raqqa - which is geographically adjacent to Deir al Zour province and shares a border with Turkey. This ongoing outbreak of cVDPV2 associated polio in Syria involving geographic areas that are undergoing civil unrest (Deir al Zour and Raqqa are both areas with intense civil unrest, where routine immunization activities are virtually non-existent) is a reminder of the challenges confronting the Global Polio Eradication Initiative. An analogous situation existed (and still exists) in Borno state, Nigeria where there is ongoing civil unrest. Last year (2016), there were 4 WPV1 associated polio cases identified in Borno state of Nigeria, the 1st confirmation of WPV1 cases in the country in 2 years, with a strain of WPV1 that was genetically related to an isolate from Borno state in 2011. A pity how the world has changed. When we began polio eradication efforts in the Americas region back in the 1980s, there were areas with civil unrest, but cease fires were regularly coordinated and implemented to permit vaccination efforts. For a map of Syria showing provinces, see  . Deir Al Zour is referred to as Dayr az Zawr in this map. The HealthMap/ProMED map of Syria can be found at  . - Mod.MPP] [", "PERTUSSIS (06): USA, CANADA *************************** A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases In this posting: USA --- [1] Virginia (Henrico County) [2] Washington (Skagit County) Canada --- [3] British Columbia [4] Alberta ****** USA --- [1] Virginia (Henrico County) Date: Wed 7 Jun 2017 3:54 pm EDT Source: 8News, WRIC [summ., edited] School officials in Henrico County [Virginia] notified parents at Glen Allen High School this week [week of 5 Jun 2017] that they have been informed of multiple cases of pertussis among students. The health department added that it is seeing an increase in the respiratory illness, also known as 'whooping cough,' in the broader community as well. If you have any questions, you may contact your child's pediatrician or Laura Young, Henrico Health District's Epidemiologist, at 804-501-5216 or . A fact sheet about pertussis can be accessed at  . [Byline: Will Armbruster] -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts [The state of Virginia can be located on the HealthMap/ProMED-mail interactive map at . Henrico County, with an estimated population of 320 717 residents, is in the US Commonwealth of Virginia and included in the Greater Richmond Region. A map showing the location of Henrico County can be found at  .] - Mod.ML ****** [2] Washington (Skagit County) Date: Thu 15 Jun 2017 5:47 PM PDT Source: KING-TV [edited] A total of 9 cases of pertussis, or whooping cough, have now been confirmed in Skagit County [Washington] and health investigators are looking at additional possible cases. At this time, the cases do not appear to be linked to any specific school or other public gathering place. Public Health is urging you to make sure you're vaccinated against the illness. If you suspect you have whooping cough, contact your health care providers. -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts [The state of Washington can be located on the HealthMap/ProMED-mail interactive map at . Skagit County, with a population of 116 901 residents in 2010, is in the US state of Washington and is included in the Seattle-Tacoma, WA Combined Statistical Area in the Puget Sound region ( ). A map showing the location of Skagit County can be found at  . - Mod.ML] ****** Canada --- [3] British Columbia Date: Wed 7 Jun 2017 2:17 PM PDT Source: The Similkameen Spotlight [edited] An increase in the number of cases of pertussis, also known as whooping cough, is being seen in the Princeton area [British Columbia]. Interior Health would like to remind the public about the importance of making sure your immunizations are up to date. The pertussis vaccine is part of the routine childhood vaccinations that are given at 2 months, 4 months, 6 months, and 18 months old, and again at age 4 to 6 years (before kindergarten). A pertussis vaccine is also given to teens at 14 to 16 years of age (grade 9) in British Columbia. The vaccine is safe and effective and parents are advised to check their child's immunization record to make sure they are up to date. It is especially important that infants receive the first dose of pertussis vaccine on time and without delay to protect them from serious pertussis complications. Information about accessing immunization records can be found at ImmunizeBC ( . To discuss pertussis immunization for children or to book an appointment, contact your local public health centre. Adults who have never been immunized for pertussis can contact their local health centre to inquire about getting the vaccine. [Byline: Andrea Demeer] -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail [The Similkameen Country roughly coincides with the basin of the river of the same name in the Southern Interior of the Canadian province of British Columbia. The Similkameen Country is mostly in the traditional territory of the Similkameen subdivision of the Okanagan people, the Upper Similkameen Indian Band being in the town of Princeton, which has a population of 2828 residents ( ). Princeton is approximately 60 miles (97 km) north of the Canadian border with the US state of Washington. For a map of this area, see  . - Mod.ML] ****** [4] Alberta Date: Thu 15 Jun 2017 5:56 PM MDT Source: Global News [edited] Alberta Health Services (AHS) says a whooping cough outbreak in southern Alberta has now impacted 38 people. The outbreak was originally declared last week [week of 5 Jun 2017] after 17 cases were detected in communities with low immunization rates. \"This outbreak is in the same area where we are seeing outbreaks of vaccine-preventable diseases on a regular basis,\" Dr Vivien Suttorp, a medical officer of health for AHS South zone said in an interview on [7 Jun 2017]. At the time, the outbreak had been contained to the western part of the AHS South zone and was limited to the communities around Lethbridge, Coaldale, and Fort Macleod. This week, however, cases related to the outbreak have been detected across southern Alberta, including 3 cases in Medicine Hat. No outbreaks have been declared in Alberta's 4 other zones but AHS says there have been 178 cases across Alberta so far this year [2017], including 18 in Calgary, 27 in Edmonton and 77 in the province's central zone, which includes Red Deer. According to AHS, immunization is the best protection against whooping cough. The vaccine is part of Alberta's routine childhood immunization schedule. Doses of the DTaP vaccine -- which delivers protection against diphtheria, whooping cough, tetanus and polio -- are recommended for all children at ages 2 months, 4 months, 6 months, 18 months, between 4 and 6 years, and again in grade 9. Adults are urged to get a booster at some point and it's recommended pregnant women get the vaccine during their third trimester of pregnancy. The vaccine is covered by Alberta Health and can be accessed through community health centres or public health offices. [Byline: Heather Yourex-West] -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts [South Zone, with a population of 281 934 residents in 2010, is the area south of Calgary, the largest city in the Canadian province of Alberta; the South Zone includes the city of Lethbridge, with a population of 92 729 residents in 2016 ( ). A map of Alberta can be found at  . - Mod.ML] [For a discussion of pertussis, please see my moderator comments in ProMED-mail post Pertussis - USA: (CA) fatal http://promedmail.org/post/20150115.3093551 and my colleague Mod.LL's comments in Pertussis - USA (06) http://promedmail.org/post/20160917.4495935. - Mod.ML] [", "RECALL, PET TREAT - USA: CHEMICAL CONTAMINATION *********************************************** A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Mon 19 Jun 2017 Source: Fox News [edited] The company behind rawhide dog chew products has issued a recall for multiple brands of its products over concerns of potential chemical contamination. The move comes after United Pet Group said it received reports of pet illnesses involving diarrhea and vomiting, Fox 13 reported. The Illinois-based company, which uses manufacturing facilities in Mexico, Colombia, and Brazil, said it has identified the source of contamination but is issuing a nationwide recall for products including American Beefhide, Digest-eeze, Healthy Hide, Petco or \"Good Lovin\" Hill Country Fare, Priority Pet, Exer-Hides, Essential Everyday, Enzadent or Dentalhex, Dentley's, and Companion. In a press release, the company said the facilities were using a quaternary ammonium compound mixture as a processing aid, which is not approved in the US. Exposure to the compound could cause pets to experience reduced appetite and gastric irritation, Fox 13 reported. The affected products have an expiration date ranging from 6/01/2019 through 5/31/2020. Consumers are urged to dispose of the product or return it for a full refund. -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail [These are rawhide chews. They should be used as a treat, not as a meal or a meal replacement for the pet. Sadly, I have seen dogs so excited to get a rawhide treat that they will chew a little and gulp a lot, without completely chewing the product. This has been known to produce vomiting. Any gastric irritation from possibly hard material or even sharp points on the material can produce either vomiting or diarrhea, or both. The press release is not specific on the quaternary ammonia, which is a broad category of numerous chemicals. Without knowing which chemicals or the level of chemicals in the rawhide chews, it is impossible to comment on more clinical signs or possible sequelae. What is most prominent in this press release is this chemical(s) is/are not approved for use in this product in the USA. Products in treats or foods not approved for such use are subject to recall. The press release also states the problem(s) at the production site(s) have been identified, inferring these issues will be resolved. Hopefully few pets are affected and the pet treats will soon return to the market. - Mod.TG A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  .] [", "LASSA FEVER - WEST AFRICA (23): NIGERIA (ONDO) ********************************************** A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Thu 22 Jun 2017 Source: Nigerian Tribune [edited] Following the fresh outbreak of Lassa fever in the Northern senatorial district of Ondo State, the State government and the management of Achievers' University, Owo have put in place some proactive measures to curb the spread of the deadly disease. A total of 3 people had been identified to be hit with the fever in the ancient town of Owo, in Owo local government area of the state with 2 others from Akoko South West local government area of the state. Speaking on the development, the Vice Chancellor [VC] of Achievers University, Prof. Samuel Ibiyemi, denied the outbreak of the Lassa fever within the university environment but confirmed that 1 of the students has been hit with the fever. Ibiyemi, however, disclosed that the affected student was not living within the students' hostel but lived with her parents in Owo town, saying the fever was imported from the town to the academic community. The VC said \"one of the students of the university reported to the university health center for treatment. However, she was not responding to treatment and as usual, had to be transferred to the FMC where she was diagnosed of having Lassa fever symptoms. She has since been stabilized and will be discharged anytime soon.\" According to him, the investigation carried out by the school revealed that the affected student contacted the disease from outside the school, adding that \"none of her roommates and friends, who have been screened, developed symptoms of the ailment.\" Ibiyemi however said that the management of the institution has decided to give the students of the university a 3-week mid- semester break from [Tue 20 Jun 2017] to allay the fears of the parents who have been calling to inquire about the welfare of their children. He also said the management of the school has concluded all arrangements to carry out precautionary measures against the outbreak of the disease in the school. He said \"This will allow the agitated parents to see their children and rest assured that they [are] safe and sound. The break will also enable the university to carry out the necessary precaution measures before the students resume back to school on [Sun 9 Jul 2017].\" He added that some health officials from the Federal Medical Center (FMC) Owo, had visited the school to educate the students and staff of the institution on how to guard against the disease, while he also disclosed that collaboration has been established between the school and the ministry of health in the state. \"The management takes the overall wellbeing of its staff and students seriously. Nothing is therefore, spared to ensure this.\" the VC said. However, the Permanent Secretary in the ministry of Health, Dr Taiye Oni disclosed that out of the 4 cases recorded in the state, 2 were recorded in Owo metropolis and another 2 in Akoko South West local government area of the state. He explained that the latest Lassa fever occurrence was coming at unusual time but said the state government has reactivated its disease notification and surveillance mechanism. He advised the people to properly store their foods, especially grains and also \"to give priority to personal and environmental hygiene at this critical time\" \"[The] Government is doing its best to contain the recorded cases by isolating the patients, to prevent further spread, and we have embarked on aggressive contact tracing, sensitization of the people not just in Owo and Ose but across the state on preventing and precautionary measures. \"Most times, we have always run to Irrua Specialist Hospital in Edo state but the facility is already overwhelmed with so many cases across the country which is why we are collaborating with the Federal Medical Center, Owo in handling the recorded cases. \"We are supporting FMC Owo with protective kits, injections and tablets and just as we appeal to people with cases of me occurring fever to visit the nearest government hospital for necessary attention.\" he said. [Byline: Badmus Bimbola] -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts [These are not the 1st cases to be reported in Ondo state this year (2017). The Nigeria Centre for Disease Control [NCDC] Weekly Epidemiological Report 7(21) reported that as of week 21 [week ending 27 May 2017] in Ondo state this year (2017) 13 cases have been reported of which 6 were laboratory confirmed and with 2 deaths (see Lassa fever - West Africa (21): Nigeria http://promedmail.org/post/20170617.5112720). As noted in earlier comments, Lassa fever remains a problem in Nigeria because the virus is endemic there. Virus transmission to humans occurs when people are in contact with the reservoir rodent host, the multimammate mouse (in the genus _Mastomys_) or their excreta. Transmission also occurs in health facilities when personal protective equipment is not employed and barrier nursing practices are not adequate to protect staff from blood and secretions of infected patients. Images of _Mastomys_ mice, the rodent reservoir of Lass fever virus, can be seen at . Maps of Nigeria can be accessed at  and  . - Mod.TY] [", "JAPANESE ENCEPHALITIS AND OTHER - INDIA (06): (MAHARASHTRA) *********************************************************** A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Thu 22 Jun 2017, 02.30 AM IST Source: Pune Mirror [edited] On [Sat 10 Jun 2017], a couple from Kondhwa rushed their 10-month-old infant to a hospital after vomiting bouts, constant cough and noticeable abnormal behaviour. Suspecting that the kid might have contracted Japanese encephalitis (JE) -- an infection that corrodes brain cells -- the doctors sent his blood samples to the National Institute of Virology (NIV), which confirmed their suspicion. The diagnosis, a 1st in the city and 2nd in the state [this year, 2017], has got government officials on their toes. The state epidemiology cell and Pune Municipal Corporation (PMC) epidemiology cell have been keeping a close watch on the situation to ensure that it does not go out of control. Inamdar Multispecialty Hospital in Kondhwa communicated the diagnosis to the civic officials after the 10-month-old infant's week-long struggle in the intensive care unit. After NIV's confirmation, the doctors conveyed results that showed severe inflammation of the brain caused by Japanese encephalitis virus that is transmitted by the bite of infected _Culex vishnui_ [group] mosquitoes. The baby is currently stable and out of danger. He has been shifted to the general ward. Officials at the PMC's health department claim that the infant contracted the disease when he and his family were in Vile Parle, Mumbai, 2 weeks earlier. Mukund Diggikar, joint director of malaria, filaria, water-borne and vector-borne diseases at the health department, said, \"Ever since the blood samples turned out to be positive, we have issued orders among officials to immediately survey the area. The need of the hour is to avoid further outbreaks.\" He added that the district malaria officer along with the state epidemiology and PMC epidemiology cell have been asked to visit the areas along with insect collectors. \"We are on high alert as this is the 1st case of JE in Pune and 2nd in the state. The 1st case in the state was reported in Raigad,\" Diggikar said. PMC epidemiology cell chief, Dr Kalpana Baliwant, said that they quickly got into action after the orders. They visited Kondhwa for a survey and to eradicate _Culex vishnui_ breeding spots. However, they found none. \"We even checked houses and societies for breeding spots. This survey will continue for a couple of days,\" she said. With the intensive survey in motion, Dr Vikram Padbidri, infectious disease expert at Jehangir Hospital, Pune told Pune Mirror of the measures one can take on a personal level to avoid JE, cases of which are diagnosed mostly during [the] monsoon. \"JE commonly affects children. Most of the cases tend to be asymptomatic. Some might suffer from mild symptoms like fever and headache. About 1 in 250 cases may land up with severe manifestations like high fever, headache, neck stiffness, disorientation, coma, seizures and paralysis which could ultimately result in death,\" he said. Padbidri added that JE can be prevented by simply avoiding mosquito bites, use of repellents, mosquito nets and eliminating breeding places of the mosquito. \"Nowadays JE vaccine is also available in the market,\" he said. In 2015, 7 JE cases were diagnosed in the state. In the following year, the number spiked to 12. [Byline: Vicky Pathare] -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts [There were 2 JE cases confirmed in the city in December 2016 (see Japanese encephalitis & other - India (39): (MA) http://promedmail.org/post/20161223.4720235). Although avoidance of mosquito bites as recommended above is prudent, vaccination is the best protective measure. JE cases are relatively uncommon in this area, and in addition to a very young age, may account for the infant not having been vaccinated. The virus is endemic in north western India with birds as reservoir hosts and pigs as amplifiers. The _Culex_ mosquito vectors can become very abundant seasonally, breeding in wetlands. Vector control is difficult. - Mod. TY Maps of India can be accessed at  .] [", "CHOLERA, DIARRHEA AND DYSENTERY UPDATE (58): ASIA (YEMEN) ********************************************************* A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Thu 22 Jun 2017, 7:55 AM Source: WHTC [edited] UN [United Nations] humanitarian chief Stephen O'Brien described the cholera outbreak in Yemen, which is fast approaching 300 000 cases, as a \"man-made catastrophe\" caused by the warring sides in the country's civil war and their international backers. The number of suspected cases of the disease, which is caused by ingesting bacteria from water or food contaminated with feces, reached 179 548 by [Tue 20 Jun 2017], with 1205 deaths, according to the WHO. \"This is because of conflict, it's man-made, it's very severe, the numbers are absolutely staggering, it's getting worse, and the cholera element in addition to the lack of food, the lack of medical supplies, primarily one has to put that at the door of all the parties to the conflict,\" O'Brien said. \"Be that the parties on the ground or their proxies, they all have to recognize that there is a shared responsibility for causing a man-made humanitarian catastrophe, which is where we are in Yemen at the moment.\" A Reuters analysis of WHO data showed the cholera caseload is growing at more than 4 percent a day, while the number of deaths is rising at just over 3.5 percent a day. That marks a slowdown in the spread of the disease compared to the early stages of the 8-week outbreak, but still puts the number of cases on course to reach 300 000 in the 1st week of July 2017, while deaths are expected to rise to 2000. That means the disease is spreading twice as quickly as the WHO feared. The WHO's representative in Yemen said on [Mon 19 May 2017] that the 300 000-mark might come within 6 months. Yemen's cholera epidemic follows an economic collapse and 2 years of civil war which has left 19 million people in need of humanitarian aid. The exiled government of President Abd-Rabbu Mansour Hadi, supported by the US-backed, Saudi-led coalition, is trying to roll back gains made by the Iran-aligned Houthi group which controls most of northern Yemen, including the capital Sana'a. Nigel Timmins, humanitarian director at aid charity Oxfam, which has called for a \"cholera ceasefire\", told a UN meeting on [Wed 21 Jun 2017, that governments were stoking the war rather than prioritizing the humanitarian crisis. \"In Yemen, governments who are providing generous funding are also making money from supplying weapons, munitions, military equipment, technology. They are providing logistical and financial support for the military action taking place,\" he said. \"Diplomatic pressure on the warring parties inside and outside the country has to be made so that we can find solutions, because surely that is a priority over arms sales?\" [Byline: Tom Miles] -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail [The statistics of the impressive ongoing epidemic in Yemen in 2017 are: Date (2017) / Cases / Deaths 8 May / 1360 / 25 11 May / 2752 / 51 13 May / 8595 / 115 14 May / 11 000 / 180 17 May / 17 200 / 209 19 May / 23 500 / 242 21 May / 29 300 / 315 22 May / 35 217 / 361 24 May / 42 207 / 420 27 May / 51 832 / 471 30 May / 65 300 / 532 02 Jun / 73 700 / 605 04 Jun / 86 400 / 676 05 Jun / 91 400 / 728 06 Jun / 96 000 / 746 07 Jun / 101 820 / 789 10 Jun / 116 700 / 869 12 Jun / 124 002 / 923 14 Jun / 140 116 / 989 16 Jun / 151 000 / 1054 19 Jun / 166 976 / 1146 21 Jun / 179 548 / 1205 To be consistent with past posts, the date is the day prior to the specific posting but, as this one, may not reflect the data point day. In the last 4 weeks, almost 150 000 cases and almost 900 deaths have been reported, and despite the post reporting a slow down, with no clear sign of the numbers slowing down. Referring to the epidemic as \"man-made\" does not imply biowarfare but rather being related to the armed conflict. There is no evidence that the spread of cholera in Yemen is deliberate at this point. Regarding cholera as a biological weapon: \"During World War II, the Japanese biological weapons program known as Unit 731 located in Pingfan Manchuria (24 km -approx. 15 mi- south of Harbin) experimented with _Vibrio cholerae_ as a weapons agent. It was reported that the Japanese dropped cholera and typhus cultures into more than 1000 Chinese wells and reportedly caused 10 000 cases in 1941. However, an estimated 1700 of the deaths were Japanese soldiers, a testimony to the difficulty of protecting one's own troops from biological agents and controlling infections. South Africa's biological weapons program, Project Coast (1981-1994), under the direction of Colonel Wouter Basson, developed cholera as a possible biological agent. It was reported that during South Africa's civil war, cholera, anthrax and other bacteria were released into water in rebel-held areas. Iraq's biological weapons program reportedly began with the start of the Al-Hazen Institute in 1974 where cholera was one of the biological agents under study. North Korea reportedly also studied cholera as a possible biological weapons agent.\"  - Mod.LL A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  .] [", "MEASLES UPDATE (33): USA, EUROPE, AFRICA **************************************** A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases In this update: USA --- [1] New York: alert Europe --- [2] France [3] Italy [4] UK (Wales) Africa --- [5] South Africa (Limpopo ex Gauteng) ****** USA ---- [1] New York: alert Date: Wed 21 Jun 2017 12:22 PM EDT Source: Times Union [edited] The [New York] State Department of Health said [Sun 18 Jun 2017] that a healthcare worker from the Queensbury-based Hudson Headwaters Health Network is infected with measles, putting others at risk of being infected. Just days after a mumps warning was issued for the Capital Region, the department warned residents of Saratoga and Warren counties about the whereabouts of the health worker from [5-8 Jun 2017], when he could have potentially exposed others to the disease. Anyone who visited the locations listed [at the source URL above] may have been exposed. The highly contagious respiratory disease is spread by direct contact with nasal and throat secretions of the infected persons. Symptoms include a runny nose, cough, and slight fever. Eyes may become reddened and sensitive to light while the fever gradually rises each day, often peaking as high as 103-105 deg F [39.5-40.5 deg C]. Small bluish white spots surrounded by a reddish area may also appear on the inside of the mouth. After a few days, the red blotchy rash breaks out on the skin. The rash usually begins on the face and spreads downward and outward, reaching the hands and feet. The rash fades in the same order it appears. A person can spread measles from 4 days before the onset of a rash. While considered a childhood illness, it can be contacted at any age, health department officials said. Those born before 1 Jan 1957 and received 2 doses of MMR (measles, mumps and rubella) vaccine or have lab tests confirming immunity are unlikely to become ill with the disease. The Saratoga County and Warren County Health Departments have alerted area health care providers of the measles exposures and are working with the Hudson Headwaters to identify and contact individuals who may have been exposed to provide education and guidance. The health department will issue a regional health advisory to health care providers to notify them of the potential exposure. Health care providers should report all suspected cases of measles to their county health department. The best way to avoid measles, health officials said, is be vaccinated. [Byline: Wendy Liberator] -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts [The state of New York can be located on the HealthMap/ProMED-mail interactive map at . A county map can be seen at  . - Sr.Tech.Ed.MJ] ****** Europe ----- [2] France Date: Mon 19 Jun 2017 Source: Outbreak News Today [edited] The number of measles cases reported in France during the 1st 5 months of 2017 is 295, according to Sante publique France (computer translated). This is 6 times the number of cases reported during the same period in 2016 (47). Measles has circulated widely in the general population in metropolitan France this year [2017], with 40 percent of the departments in France reporting at least 1 case. Outbreaks have been reported in Lorraine, New Aquitaine, and Occitanie. Now the health minister wants to make 11 vaccines compulsory, according to a The Local report. New health minister Agnes Buzyn said she wants to extend the number of mandatory vaccinations to 11 to include immunizations against conditions such as measles, hepatitis B, meningitis C, rubella, mumps, and whooping cough. Currently, only diphtheria, tetanus, and polio are mandatory in France. This follows Italy's new decree to make 12 vaccines compulsory for schoolchildren. According to health officials, from 1 Jan 2008-31 Dec 2016, in 9 years, more than 24 000 measles cases were reported in France (nearly 15 000 cases in the year 2011 alone). Nearly 1500 cases had severe pneumonia, 34 neurological complications (31 encephalitis, 1 myelitis, 2 Guillain-Barre), and 10 died. [Byline: Robert Herriman] -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts [Maps of France can be seen at  and  . - Sr.Tech.Ed.MJ] ****** [3] Italy Date: Thu 15 Jun 2017 Source: West [edited] In Italy, from the beginning of the current year [2017], measles cases have been nearly 3000. According to the Ministry of Health, which has just published the 12th edition of the weekly bulletin [ in Italian], whose dissemination began about 2 months ago in order to better monitor the phenomenon, it is a downward trend. Anyway, the data still remain worrisome. The average age was to 27 years, but almost 180 patients (6 percent) were younger than 1 year; 89 percent of the cases involved individuals who had not been vaccinated and 6 percent vaccinated but just 1 dose. 35 percent reported one or more complications, including diarrhea, stomatitis, keratoconjunctivitis, pneumonia, hepatitis, and respiratory insufficiency. [Byline: Roberta Lunghini] -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts [89 percent of the cases not being vaccinated should be ample warning to parents to vaccinate their children! Maps of Italy can be accessed at  and  - Mod.LK] ****** [4] UK (South Wales) Date: Wed 21 Jun 2017 Source: South Wales Argus [edited] GP practices in the Newport area [South Wales] are setting up extra vaccination sessions for the MMR [measles, mumps, rubella] vaccine, following an outbreak of measles at a city school. There have been 5 confirmed cases of the virus among pupils at Lliswerry High School, and vaccination sessions there and at 6 primary schools in the immediate area have resulted in almost 300 children receiving MMR. The vaccine is part of the routine childhood immunisation programme offered in the UK, but not all children are fully protected. \"We are pleased that GPs are putting in place extra vaccination sessions to ensure that as many people as possible are protected from measles,\" said Heather Lewis, consultant in health protection for Public Health Wales. \"Measles is highly infectious and the only way to prevent large outbreaks is through vaccination. \"Public Health Wales continues to urge parents to ensure their children have received 2 doses of the MMR vaccine to protect them against measles and its complications.\" The 1st dose of MMR is usually given to babies at between 12 and 13 months of age, and the 2nd at 3 years and 4 months of age. But experts stress that it is never too late to catch up on missed doses. -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts [Maps of Wales can be seen at  and  - Mod.LK] ****** [5] South Africa (Limpopo ex Gauteng) Date: Wed 21 Jun 2017 Source: Eyewitness news [edited] A total of 3 cases of measles have been confirmed in Modimolle, Limpopo. The Limpopo Health Department says that 3 adults contracted the disease after travelling to Gauteng. Last month a measles outbreak was declared in Gauteng after 17 cases were detected. The provincial department this week launched a measles campaign aimed at children between 6 months and 5-years-old. Health MEC [Member of the Executive Council] Phophi Ramathuba says: \"Once one child is infected, it spreads to a creche [nursery or daycare facility] and can spread through a community.\" [Byline: Tebogo Tshwane, edited: Shimoney Regter] -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts [Maps of South Africa can be seen at  and  - Mod.LK] [", "E. COLI EHEC - UK: (ENGLAND) O157 ********************************* A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Tue 20 Jun 2017 Source: Leicester Mercury [edited] Parents have been warned to be alert for signs of a \"very infectious\" strain of _E. coli_ after a pupil was taken ill. A pupil from Thurnby Lodge Primary, in Leicester, contracted the O157 strain of the bug, which can cause kidney damage. The source of the infection, caught over the half-term holidays, is not known, the school said. The severity of the illness has not been disclosed, but pupils in the same class were sent letters by Public Heath England. The letter said because the strain was very infectious it could be spread easily within families and other settings such as schools where there were younger children and it was difficult to keep everything thoroughly clean. Symptoms of this _E. coli_ infection include diarrhea. In about 50 per cent of cases, sufferers have bloody diarrhea, stomach cramps and fever. The letter said that transmission could be prevented through good hygiene. Parents were told to take their child to their GP should they show any of the symptoms. Public Health England said it was trying to identify the source of the infection. A spokesman said: \"_E. coli_ is contracted in a number of ways environmentally, so this can be difficult to confirm.\" Sources of infection include eating infected food such as raw leafy vegetables undercooked meat or raw milk products. Touching infected animals or accidentally coming into contact with their feces, such as at petting farms and campsites can also lead to infection. Contact with infected people, poor food hygiene and cleanliness, drinking water from poorly treated water supplies or swimming or playing in infected water, such as ponds or streams, are other sources. A spokeswoman for the school said: \"Thurnby Lodge Primary has received no further notifications of such incidents and it is deemed likely that the child was infected outside of school during the holidays. The letters from Public Health England came via the academy and were just a precautionary measure.\" _E. coli_ normally lives in the intestines of humans and animals. Although most strains are harmless, several are known to produce toxins that can cause diarrhea. The O157 strain can cause severe diarrhea and kidney damage. [Byline: Fiona Dryden] -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts [Outbreaks of enterohemorrhagic _E. coli_ are not uncommon in primary school and day care centers, as, especially with young children, there is ample opportunity for child-to-child transmission related to less than ideal hygiene. Toddlers are marvelous sharers of toys as well as fecally contaminated hands. - Mod.LL A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  .] [", "BORNAVIRUS - AUSTRIA: EQUINE, CLINICAL DISEASE, SHREW ****************************************************** A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Wed 21 Jun 2017 Source: University of Veterinary Medicine, Vienna, Press release [edited] Bornaviruses cause a lethal form of encephalitis, called Borna disease, among horses and sheep. To date [Wed 21 Jun 2017] there have been only a few reported cases in Austria. Recently, however, 4 horses were afflicted in the same area of Upper Austria within just 2 years. Tests conducted on local shrews, the only known reservoir host for the virus, confirmed the suspicion of a local viral reservoir. A large proportion of the small mammals investigated by the researchers from Vetmeduni Vienna tested positive for Bornaviruses, which were revealed to be genetically distinct from strains found in neighbouring regions such as Bavaria. The study, conducted in cooperation with the Austrian Agency for Health and Food Safety (AGES) and local veterinarians, and published in the journal Emerging Microbes & Infections, documents this rare outbreak of Borna disease in a new endemic area in Austria. Clinical signs of Borna disease among horses and sheep include behavioural disturbances and disorientation. The causative agent of Borna disease, the Bornavirus, is harmless for people but triggers a lethal infection of the brain and the spinal cord among affected animals. The virus is transmitted exclusively via a reservoir host, the protected bicoloured white-toothed shrew. Infected shrews are lifelong, yet asymptomatic, carriers of the Bornavirus. Despite a declining number of cases, occasional sporadic outbreaks of the disease have been documented in Central Europe with the exception of Austria. Now researchers from Vetmeduni Vienna and the Austrian Agency for Health and Food Safety (AGES) have confirmed for the 1st time an outbreak of Borna disease in a previously unaffected area. Within a period of just 2 years, 4 horses in Upper Austria contracted the disease in locations no more than 17 km [approx. 10 mi] apart. Local bicoloured white-toothed shrews, as well as one common shrew, tested positive for the virus. The Bornaviruses that were found, however, were genetically only distantly related with the viruses found in neighbouring regions like Bavaria. The 1st indication of a possible outbreak of Borna disease came from 2 vigilant local veterinarians. They diagnosed a neurological condition among 4 horses in Upper Austria and suspected that Bornaviruses could be responsible. An examination of the afflicted horses confirmed the diagnosis and the suspicion. \"At the same time, we also tested the possible local carrier, shrews, to help assign a local aspect to the multiple cases of disease,\" says Herbert Weissenb\u00f6ck of the Institute of Pathology and Forensic Veterinary Medicine. More than 50 percent of the trapped bicoloured white-toothed shrews were positively identified as carriers of the virus. But there also was the unexpected positive test for another species of shrew living in Upper Austria. The shrews captured in the affected region also included common shrews. This species had so far not been considered a possible carrier of the Bornavirus. \"For the 1st time, we have now identified an infected common shrew. Further studies are needed to show whether this species also serves as a reservoir host or if this is an isolated case,\" says Norbert Nowotny of the Institute of Virology. The researchers also compared the Bornaviruses found in Upper Austria with the previously discovered Central European strains. \"Unlike one would expect from their geographic proximity, the Upper Austrian Bornaviruses were not genetically related to those in Bavaria but to a viral strain from Rhineland-Palatinate. Since its description, this strain has been found in other areas in Germany and now also in Austria,\" explains Nowotny. \"This shows that we are still lacking important information about how the various strains of Bornavirus spread. The identification of a previously unknown endemic area for Bornaviruses in Upper Austria was a surprise for us all.\" An earlier study by the team had confirmed that the bicoloured white-toothed shrew represents a reservoir for Bornaviruses. The viruses are present in high amounts in all organs of the shrews while the animals themselves remain asymptomatic. \"After an infection, the shrews remain lifelong hosts and even excrete the virus,\" says Nowotny. With protected animals, however, the question is how to best combat Bornavirus infections. The shrews must be kept out of the stables, for example through self-closing doors or barriers. Hygiene standards and regular controls also play an important role. \"This case has shown that many scientific studies begin with the watchful diagnosis by practicing veterinarians. This awareness must be further strengthened. The good cooperation with AGES has shown that we can make rapid progress when we work together. The proof that the Bornaviruses were present in both horses and shrews confirmed not only the veterinarians' diagnosis but will also help us to develop strategies for the future,\" says Weissenb\u00f6ck. The article \"Infections of horses and shrews with Bornaviruses in Upper Austria: a novel endemic area of Borna disease\" by Herbert Weissenbock, Zoltan Bago, Jolanta Kolodziejek, Barbara Hager, Gunter Palmetzhofer, Ralf Durrwald and Norbert Nowotny was published in Emerging Microbes and Infections [see comment]. -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail [The scientific paper, referred to in the above press release, is: Weissenbock H, Bago Z, Kolodziejek J et al. Infections of horses and shrews with Bornaviruses in Upper Austria: a novel endemic area of Borna disease. Emerg Microbes Infect. 2017;6(6):e52. doi: 10.1038/emi.2017.36. Abstract -------- \"Borna disease, a lethal infection with Borna disease virus-1 (BoDV-1), was diagnosed in 4 horses from Upper Austria in 2015 and 2016. All cases occurred in winter (2 cases in February 2015 and 2 cases in December 2016), and the maximal distance of the affected stables was 17 km [approx. 10 mi]. To demonstrate whether the causative agent was also harbored by its reservoir host, the bicolored white-toothed shrew (_Crocidura leucodon_), 28 shrews from this geographic area were collected in 2015 and investigated for the presence of BoDV-1. The shrew species were identified according to taxonomic clues and molecular barcodes. Affected horses and all shrews were investigated using histology, immunohistochemistry (IHC) and reverse transcription PCR. The horses exhibited severe nonpurulent encephalitis. Large amounts of BoDV-1 antigen were identified in their CNS. Among the 28 shrews, 9 were identified as _C. leucodon_ and 13 as _Sorex araneus_ (Common shrew; Eurasian shrew). Six _C. leucodon_ (66.7 percent) and one _S. araneus_ (7.7 percent) had BoDV-1 infections. In accordance with previous findings, the IHC of _C. leucodon_ exhibited a high amount of viral antigen in many neural and extraneural tissues. By contrast, the single positive _S. araneus_ had an exclusively neural staining pattern. Of all positive samples, whole-genome BoDV-1 sequences were generated. The acquired sequences of the affected shrews were not identical to each other and clustered around the sequences of the diseased horses belonging, surprisingly, to the German 'strain V' cluster.\" Borna disease, is described mainly in association with natural infections of horses and sheep, in which BoDV (Borna disease virus) has a main tropism for the CNS (central nervous system). Borna disease and, later, BDV were named after the town of Borna in Saxony, Germany, where an epidemic of infectious encephalitis caused a large number of equine deaths in 1885. Veterinary scientists spent many years carefully describing the natural history of BDV infection in animals in Central Europe, including infections of horses, sheep, rabbits, and birds. The infection is noncytolytic and persistent, and in the natural hosts, mood, sensorium, sensibility, motility, and the autonomous nervous system are simultaneously or successively affected, with a fatal outcome in up to 90 percent of infected animals. For epidemiological and zoonotic aspects of BoDV, see references 1- 3. Reference 4 includes a 2016 review: Abstract -------- \"The neurotropic virus, Borna disease virus (BDV), a member of a group of nonsegmented, negative strand ribonucleic acid (RNA) viruses (order Mononegavirales), infects warm-blooded animal species. Infection among mammals may be asymptomatic, produce neurobehavioral abnormalities, or result in fatal meningoencephalitis. It is unique among animal viruses in the order Mononegavirales in its nuclear localization of replication and transcription and distinctive in its capacity to establish persistent, non-cytolytic infection of the peripheral and central nervous systems. Natural infection, long described in horses and sheep, has more recently been recognized to extend to bird species in association with a related virus, avian bornavirus, as well as to divergent bornaviruses in reptiles, challenging established virus taxonomy. Nonhuman primates can be experimentally infected; however, natural infection of humans and nonhuman primates appears to be unusual. Decades-long controversy over a role for BDV infection in human neuropsychiatric illnesses has more recently waned. Nonetheless, the discovery that the genomes of humans as well as other vertebrate lineages contain remnants of BDV sequences has raised questions regarding potential evolutionary implications. Analysis of rodent models of infection has yielded insights into the mechanisms by which neurotropic agents and host immune and signaling pathway responses may impact upon developing or mature CNS circuitry to effect complex neurobehavioral disturbances.\" References ---------- 1. Kinnunen PM, Palva A, Vaheri A and Vapalahti O. Epidemiology and host spectrum of Borna disease virus infections. J Gen Virol. 2013; 94: 247-262. Available at:  . 2. H Zeller, D Domanovic, C Gossner et al. New bornavirus strain detected in the EU. 25 February 2015. European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control. Stockholm: ECDC; 2015. Available at:  . 3. B Hoffmann, D Tappe, D Hoper et al. A Variegated Squirrel Bornavirus Associated with Fatal Human Encephalitis. N Engl J Med 2015; 373:154-162July 9, 2015DOI: 10.1056/NEJMoa1415627. Available at:  . 4. Mady Hornig. Borna Disease Virus (chapter) in Springer's \"Neurotropic Viral Infections\" 2016. pp 315-336. Abstract available at:  . - Mod.AS A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  .] [", "CHOLERA, DIARRHEA AND DYSENTERY UPDATE (59): AFRICA, OCEANIA ************************************************************ A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases In this update: Africa [1] Cholera - Sudan [2] Cholera, possible - Kenya (Nairobi) hotel conference guests Oceania [3] Shigellosis - Australia (Queensland) ****** [1] Cholera - Sudan Date: Wed 21 Jun 2017 Source: All Africa, a Radio Dabanga report [edited] Sudan's cholera outbreak has expanded to include new areas in Kassala and El Gedaref states. A total of 4 people have died and more than 80 have been infected with cholera in New Halfa locality in Kassala state this week. On [Mon 19 Jun 2017], a health source told Radio Dabanga that the infections have spread to the districts of El Sawra, Kambo, Village 33 Abunajma, and Village 18 Arab. The source explained the continuous increase in the incidence of cholera and spread in various villages and districts of New Halfa. Aside from the 4 people who died in El Gedaref state on [Mon 19 Jun 2017] dozens of others were infected in El Fashaga and Galaa Elnaha. Sources said that Umsagta area in Galaa Elnahal locality recorded 2 cases and Umgargoura in El Fashaga locality recorded 2 deaths. A health source from El Gedaref said that on average, 30 cases a day visit El Gedaref Hospital. He pointed out that El Saraf El Ahmar area of El Gallabat East locality has recorded 40 cases, while the number of infections at El Hawata area has amounted to 20 cases. The health source pointed out that on [Tue 20 Jun 2017] the number of hospitalised cases at camp Umgargoura for refugees in El Gedaref amounted to 22 cases with a remarkable decrease in the number of new infections. Khartoum state -------------- Deaths and infections with cholera are still ongoing in Khartoum state. The emergency room of El Ezba district in Khartoum North reported the death of 1 case on [Tue 20 Jun 2017], bringing the number of deaths since the beginning of the epidemic --3 weeks ago-- to 20 cases while the total number of infected has been 286. An activist in the emergency room pointed to the relapse of a number of cases that have earlier received treatment. The activist spoke of continued efforts of the emergency room in the chlorination of water, spraying and sterilizing the houses of the district in addition to health education campaigns in the houses. He said that on [Tue 20 Jun 2017], the emergency room received students of the Faculty of Health of the University of Khartoum who organized a campaign of health education in homes of the district. He said the awareness team directed people not to organise mass breaking of the fast for Ramadan. In El Haj Yousif in Khartoum North, a medical source explained that the number of cases of cholera in the Albanjadeed Hospital were 27 cases, including 4 children from Eid Babikir Koran school. He mentioned the death of 1 person on [Sun 18 Jun 2017], with a remarkable increase in infection rates after having experienced a decrease during the past few days. A medical source said that the hospital in Bashayer recorded 3 deaths and 48 infection cases on [Mon 19 Jun 2017], while the number of infections at Omdurman Hospital has amounted to 50 cases, mostly from El Rashideen district. White Nile ---------- The incidence of cholera infection in the White Nile state has reportedly witnessed a substantial decrease. The National Epidemiological Corporation said in a report on [Tue 20 Jun 2017] that the number of hospitalised cases at Kosti hospital amounted to 23 with 5 new cases. Sources told Radio Dabanga that the average daily visits at Umelada village near Kosti have been 5 cases, while the number of hospitalized cases at El Marabee in El Gezira Aba has fallen to 10 including 2 critical cases. Sources attributed the decrease of the disease to appropriate medical intervention, health education, awareness campaigns and sanitation of the environment. The sources pointed out that on [Tue 20 Jun 2017], El Duweim Hospital in White Nile state recorded 1 case, while the number of hospitalized cases in the isolation centre has been 7. -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail ****** [2] Cholera, possible - Kenya (Nairobi) hotel conference guests Date: Thu 22 Jun 2017, 3:00 PM Source: The Star [edited] Guests attending a conference at Weston Hotel in Nairobi are unlikely to be suffering from cholera, doctors have said, but taken measures to prevent an outbreak. It was earlier reported that more than 50 people attending 'The Kenya International Scientific Lung Health Conference' had the disease. Reports from some doctors indicated 60 people were rushed to Nairobi's Kenyatta National Hospital. \"Afternoon doctors should come in early as more patients are being rushed in,\" read a text message one of the doctors sent his colleagues. Medics tested patients who suffered diarrhea and vomiting. At least 10 guests, including 3 doctors attending the conference, had abdominal cramps after having lunch. Medics who attended them could not confirm the infection but Nairobi Health CEC Bernard Muia said it was unlikely to be cholera. \"They had diarrhea not typical of cholera, abdominal pains and vomiting,\" he said. Muia said samples were taken to the public health laboratories in the city for testing. \"It's most probably food poisoning and could be gastroenteritis, a very common condition that causes diarrhea and vomiting,\" he told The Star. Dr George Nyale, chairman of the conference organized by the Health ministry, confirmed the outbreak but said there was no cause for alarm. In the afternoon, 2 of the guests were admitted at Nairobi hospital, 1 Karen Hospital and another at the Aga Khan facility. The Weston scare came as officers from the Naivasha department of public health investigated 9 suspected cases of cholera. The patients suffering diarrhea and other symptoms related to cholera were treated at Naivasha sub-county hospital where 2 cases were confirmed. A man who had the disease was treated and discharged. A junior officer, who did not want to be named as he is not authorized to address the press, said the 9 cases were from different estates in the town. The officer added that some of the patients were relatives of 2 cholera patients earlier treated at the hospital. \"We have treated 9 suspected cases of cholera and have put in place all measures to avoid another outbreak, especially now that it's raining heavily,\" said the officer. Dr Joseph Mburu, superintendent in charge of the county hospital, confirmed by phone that the last patient had been released. \"The county has dispatched the outbreak response team and supplied enough drugs after the 2 positive cases,\" said the officer. [Byline: Nancy Agutu and John Muchangi] -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail [The seemingly short incubation period suggests that _V. cholerae_ is not the etiology in this hotel conference-associated outbreak of gastrointestinal disease. - Mod.LL] ****** [3] Shigellosis - Australia (Queensland) Date: Wed 21 Jun 2017, 3:50 PM Source: South Burnett Times [edited] An outbreak of the Shigella bacteria has been reported in Cherbourg and Murgon. The Darling Donws Hospital and Health Service has urged residents to take extra hygiene precautions to manage the outbreak of the highly infectious bacterium, _Shigella_. Darling Downs Public Health Unit (DDPHU) Director Dr Penny Hutchinson said bacterium was transmitted person-to-person or through food. \"The most important thing people can do is thoroughly wash their hands with soap and water, especially after using the toilet or changing nappies and before handling food,\" Dr Hutchinson said. \"Symptoms include diarrhea typically containing blood and mucous, accompanied by fever, nausea and vomiting. We have alerted the 2 local hospitals and the GP practices to the outbreak, and provided information posters to community facilities such as schools and child care centres on what control measures should be in place.\" Anyone suffering from diarrhea should see their doctor and get tested. [Byline: Tobi Loftus] -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts [_Shigella_ was discovered over 100 years ago by the Japanese microbiologist, Kiyoshi Shiga, for whom the genus is named. There are 4 species: _S. boydii_, _S. dysenteriae_, _S. flexneri_, and _S. sonnei_. _Shigella_ organisms can survive transit through the stomach since they are less susceptible to acid than other bacteria; for this reason, as few as 10 to 100 organisms can cause disease. Ingested bacteria pass into the small intestine where they multiply; large numbers of bacteria then pass into the colon, where they enter the colonic cells. Given its relatively low infectious dose, transmission can occur via contaminated food and water or via direct person-to-person spread, including sexual practices more common in MSM (men who have sex with men). Humans are the only natural reservoir for the disease. Dysentery (formerly known as flux or the bloody flux) is an inflammatory disorder of the colon, which results in severe diarrhea containing mucus and/or blood in the feces with fever, abdominal pain, and rectal tenesmus (pain while passing the diarrhea). - Mod.LL A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  ,  ,  .] [", "POLIOMYELITIS UPDATE (13): SYRIA (DEIR AL ZOUR, AR RAQQA), GLOBAL ***************************************************************** A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Thu 22 Jun 2017 Source: Global Polio Eradication Initiative [edited] Poliovirus Weekly Update As of: 21-Jun-2017, World Health Organization New wild poliovirus cases reported this week: 0 Total number of wild poliovirus cases in 2017: 6 Total number of wild poliovirus cases in 2016: 37 New cVDPV cases reported this week: 15 Total number of cVDPV cases in 2017: 21 Total number of cVDPV cases in 2016: 5  Headlines - In Syria, 15 new cases of circulating vaccine-derived poliovirus type 2 (cVDPV2) were reported in the past week [week of 11-17 Jun 2017], bringing the total number of cVDPV2 cases in the country to 17. Up to 16 of the 17 cases are from Mayadeen district, Deir-Al-Zour governorate, and one case is from Raqua district, Raqua governorate. All cases had onset of paralysis between [3 Mar 2017 and 23 May 2017]. - The 14th report of the Independent Monitoring Board (IMB ) has been published, following the group's meeting in May [2017]. Summary of newly-reported viruses this week: Syria - 15 new circulating vaccine-derived poliovirus type 2 (cVDPV2) were isolated from acute flaccid paralysis (AFP) cases, and 4 new cVDPV2 isolated from healthy community contacts. Pakistan - one new wild poliovirus type 1 (WPV1) isolated from an environmental sample. See country-specific sections below for more details. Afghanistan - No new wild poliovirus type 1 (WPV1) cases were reported in the past week. The total number of WPV1 cases for 2017 remains 4. The most recent WPV1 case had onset of paralysis on [16 Apr 2017] from Nawzad district, Hilmand province. - With most of Afghanistan polio-free, efforts are focused on continuing to strengthen operations, in close coordination with Pakistan, to address remaining low-level transmission in the common reservoir area of the Quetta-Kandahar corridor. - Afghanistan is carrying out a programme review focusing on the implementation of the National Emergency Action Plan and making necessary adjustments for the second half of 2017. - Polio eradication teams from East and South East Afghanistan and neighbouring FATA and Khyber Pakhtunkhwa in Pakistan met in Kabul on [24-25 May 2017] to review the current coordination mechanisms and agree on additional measures to further improve implementation in the WPV common reservoirs. Core teams from the National Emergency Operation Centres Afghanistan and Pakistan also met to discuss next steps on further improving the vaccination strategies for high risk mobile populations. Pakistan - No new wild poliovirus type 1 (WPV1) cases were reported in the past week. The total number of WPV1 cases for 2017 remains 2. The most recent case had onset of paralysis on [13 Feb 2017], from Diamir district, Gilgit Baltistan. - One new WPV1 isolate from an environmental sample was reported in the past week, collected on [5 Jun 2017] from Karachi Gadap, Sindh. - The year 2016 saw the lowest ever annual number of polio cases in the country but poliovirus continues to be isolated through environmental surveillance over a significant geographical range. Efforts are ongoing through implementation of the national emergency action plan to address remaining gaps in coverage and surveillance, in close coordination with neighbouring Afghanistan. - The National Polio Management Team met on [8-9 Jun 2017] to review implementation of the National Emergency Action Plan during the low transmission season, and to agree on essential adjustments to the plan for the second half of 2017. Nigeria - No new cases of wild poliovirus type 1 (WPV1) were reported in the past week [week of 11-17 Jun 2017]. The total number of WPV1 cases for 2016 remains 4 and no cases have been reported in 2017. The most recent case had onset of paralysis on [21 Aug 2016] in Monguno Local Government Area (LGA), Borno. - Nigeria continues to implement emergency response to the detected WPV1 strain and circulating vaccine-derived poliovirus type 2 (cVDPV2) strains affecting the country. - The response is part of a broader regional outbreak response, coordinated with neighboring countries, in particular the Lake Chad sub-region, including northern Cameroon, parts of Central African Republic, Chad and southern Niger. - Detection of the polio cases in Nigeria underscores the risk posed by low-level undetected transmission and the urgent need to strengthen subnational surveillance. Lake Chad Basin - The detection of wild poliovirus type 1 (WPV1) and circulating vaccine-derived poliovirus type 2 (cVDPV2) in Nigeria poses a risk to the neighboring countries of the Lake Chad basin and hence an outbreak response plan is being implemented as part of the response to the Nigeria outbreak. - Emergency outbreak response efforts continue across the Lake Chad basin, together with activities to fill subnational surveillance gaps across the region. Central Africa - No new cases were reported in the past week [week of 11-17 Jun 2017]. The Democratic Republic of the Congo (DR Congo) is affected by 2 separate outbreaks of circulating vaccine derived poliovirus type 2 (cVDPV2), in Haut Lomami province (2 cases, with onset of paralysis on [8 Mar 2017 and 20 Feb 2017]); and in Maniema province (2 cases with onset of paralysis on [26 Mar 2017 and 18 Apr 2017], with an additional isolate detected in a healthy individual with sample collection on [2 May 2017]). - Outbreak response plans are currently being finalized, with supplementary immunization activities using monovalent oral polio vaccine type 2 (mOPV2) in line with internationally-agreed outbreak response protocols. - The 1st mOPV2 campaign is planned for [27-29 Jul 2017], targeting more than 750 000 children under the age of 5 years in the 2 affected provinces. - Surveillance and immunization activities are being strengthened in neighboring countries. - DR Congo is also affected by an Ebola outbreak, in Bas Uele province in the north of the country. Coordination among both outbreak response teams will be necessary and teams are already working on this. Syrian Arab Republic - In Syria, 15 new cases of circulating vaccine-derived poliovirus type 2 (cVDPV2) were reported in the past week [week of 11-17 Jun 2017], bringing the total number of cVDPV2 cases to 17. Up to 16 of the 17 cases are from Mayadeen district, Deir-Al-Zour governorate, and one case is from Raqua district, Raqua governorate. All cases had onset of paralysis between [3 Mar 2017 and 23 May 2017]. Additionally, 4 cVDPV2s were also isolated from healthy community contacts, all from Mayadeen (collected in [April and May 2017]). - Of a total of 65 acute flaccid paralysis (AFP) cases detected in Deir-Al-Zour since the start of 2017, 16 have now tested positive for cVDPV2 (with the 17th case from Raqua), 22 have tested negative, 5 are pending for final laboratory results and 22 specimens are en route to a laboratory for processing. - Confirmation of these latest cases is not unexpected at this time and does not change the operational situation, as outbreak response plans are being finalized, in line with internationally-agreed outbreak response protocols. Although access to Deir-Al-Zour is compromised due to insecurity, the Governorate has been partially reached by several vaccination campaigns against polio and other vaccine-preventable diseases since the beginning of 2016. Most recently, 2 campaigns have been conducted in March and April 2017 using the bivalent oral polio vaccine ([bOPV]). However, only limited coverage was possible through these campaigns. Officially reported wild poliovirus cases as of 20 Jun 2017 - Total global cases in 2017: 6 (compared with 17 for the same period in 2016) - Total in endemic countries in 2017: 6 (compared with 17 for the same period in 2016) - Total in non-endemic countries in 2017: 0 (compared with 0 for the same period in 2016) - Afghanistan: 4 cases in 2017 (compared with 6 for the same period in 2016), onset of paralysis of most recent case: 16-Apr-17 - Pakistan: 2 cases in 2017 (compared with 11 for the same period in 2016), onset of paralysis of most recent case: 13-Feb-17 - Nigeria: 0 case in 2017 (compared with 0 for the same period in 2016), onset of paralysis of most recent case: 21-Aug-16 - Total global cases in 2016: 37 - Total in endemic countries: 37 - Total in non-endemic countries: 0 Officially reported cVDPV cases as of 20 Jun 2017 Total global cases in 2017: 21 (compared with 3 for the same period in 2016) - Syrian Arab Republic: 17 cases in 2017 (compared with 0 for the same period in 2016), onset of paralysis of most recent case: 23-May-17 - Democratic Republic of the Congo: 4 cases in 2017 (compared with 0 for the same period in 2016), onset of paralysis of most recent case: 18-Apr-17 - Pakistan: 0 case in 2017 (compared with 0 for the same period in 2016), onset of paralysis of most recent case: 17-Dec-16 - Nigeria: 0 case in 2017 (compared with 0 for the same period in 2016), onset of paralysis of most recent case: 28-Oct-16 - Lao People's Democratic Republic: 0 case in 2017 (compared with 3 for the same period in 2016), onset of paralysis of most recent case: 11-Jan-16 - Total global cases in 2016: 5 - Total in endemic countries: 2 - Total in non-endemic countries: 3 -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail [I've included today's weekly polio report from the Global Polio Eradication Initiative as it has a few more details on the ongoing outbreak of cVDPV2 in Syria, as well as further updated information. As with previous reports, the above report has good news and not so good news. The good news is encouraging. First there have been no additional cases of WPV1 anywhere in the world, especially in the 3 remaining endemic countries since mid-April 2017. Second, no additional cVDPV cases have been reported from the Democratic Republic of the Congo. The not so good news starts with the ongoing outbreak of cVDPV2 in areas of civil unrest in Syria - Deir al Zour and Raqqa. The number of confirmed cases is now at 17, plus an additional 4 asymptomatic contacts were found to be infected. As mentioned yesterday, the identification of a case in a 2nd province is also of concern. A second cause for concern is the continued isolation of WPV1 in environmental samples in Pakistan, the most recent having been collect during the 1st week of June 2017 in Sindh, confirming that the WPV1 is still circulating in Pakistan. Third, we have learned from an EpiCore surveillance project member that both WPV1 and cVDPV2 have been isolated from environmental samples in Nigeria although I do not have information on dates of most recent isolation of both virus types in Nigeria. So, a current interpretation of the overall situation is that eradication of polio (including WPV1 and cVDPV is near but potentially far as we have seen how the virus(es) can circulate \"silently\" for prolonged periods of time, especially in areas with civil unrest, where the health infrastructure has been virtually dismantled permitting accumulations of ever enlarging pockets of susceptibles that can sustain circulation of the virus (both WPV and cVDPV) when introduced. For those who are interested in reading an update on the status of poliovirus type 2 containment, there is an article in today's MMWR: Previsani N, Singh H, St. Pierre J, et al. Progress Toward Containment of Poliovirus Type 2 -- Worldwide, 2017. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 2017;66:649-652. DOI: . A map showing the locations of both WPV1 and cVDPV2 cases worldwide can be found at: . For a map of Syria showing provinces, see  . Deir Al Zour is referred to as Dayr az Zawr in this map. The HealthMap/ProMED map of Syria can be found at  . - Mod.MPP] [", "FOOT AND MOUTH DISEASE - UGANDA: (KUMI) BOVINE, SUSPECTED, VACCINATION, REQUEST FOR INFORMATION *********************************************************************************************** A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Wed 21 Jun 2017 Source: NTV-Uganda [edited] The district veterinary officer for Kumi, Dr Michael Okwalinga, wants a thorough investigation of the vaccine supplied by government to vaccinate cattle on Tisai Island, Ongino sub-county in the district 2 months ago [April 2017]. This comes after the vaccinated animals tested positive for the deadly foot and mouth disease virus. Dr Okwalinga said his visit to the island a week ago [week of 11-17 Jun 2017], confirmed that the vaccinated animals were the ones which had contracted the virus. -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail [The meaning of \"tested positive\" deserves clarification. Have the animals shown clinical FMD signs? What test has been applied? Accurate information on the dates of vaccination and of the appearance of 1st signs of disease in the vaccinated animals, is essential. In case 2 months elapsed between the vaccination and the appearance of disease, it would be unlikely to attribute infection to vaccination. In case a virus has been isolated from the affected cattle, its serotype, as well as the composition of the vaccine, are also needed for the investigation wanted by the district veterinary officer. Applying the expression \"The deadly FMD virus\" is somewhat far-reaching. FMD viruses may be lethal in very young animals (sheep, goats, cattle). In adults, mortality will, generally, not exceed 2-5 percent, though the virus may seriously affect the animals' production records. - Mod.AS A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  .] [", "HAND, FOOT & MOUTH DISEASE UPDATE (05): THAILAND (SA KAEO) ********************************************************** A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Wed 21 Jun 2017 Source: The Nation [edited] A municipality kindergarten in Sa Kaeo's Muang district has been closed after a 2-year-old boy died from [hand-foot-mouth disease]. The elder sister of the boy now feels sick and was sent to Siriraj Hospital in Bangkok. Captain Apinan Songkramchai, a provincial commander, said that the Kilosong Tessaban kindergarten was ordered closed on [Tue 20 Jun 2017] and public health officials and staff are now cleaning the premises with disinfectants. The boy lived in Aranyaprathet district and had been suffering from the foot-and-mouth virus for about 4 days. His death alerted authorities, which led to the closure of the kindergarten, Apinan said. Meanwhile Kornchai Srikoon, the mayor of Muang Aranyaprathet municipality, said that he was alerted of the death of the pupil on Tuesday afternoon [20 Jun 2017]. At a temple, the boy's father said that he usually took his children to Rongklua border Market and he suspected that his boy caught the disease there. He revealed that his daughter, aged 4, now feels sick with the same symptoms as her brother, so his wife took their daughter to hospital on Tuesday night [20 Jun 2017]. -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts [Thailand health officials had issued an advisory in February 2017, after reporting increased numbers of hand-foot-mouth disease (HFMD), mostly in children under the age of 5. [See ProMED mail Hand, foot & mouth disease update (02): Thailand, Viet Nam http://promedmail.org/post/20170303.4875744.] Since the beginning of the year through 19 Feb 2017, the Thailand Bureau of Epidemiology reported a total of 7684 cases from all 77 provinces. No deaths were reported. The highest rates of infection were reported from Suratthani, Chanthaburi, Chiengrai, Lampang, and Phuket provinces. HFMD is typically a benign and self-limiting disease. Most common in young children, it presents as fever, oral lesions, and rash on the hands, feet, and buttocks. The oral lesions consist of rapidly-ulcerating vesicles on the buccal mucosa, tongue, palate, and gums. The rash consists of papulovesicular lesions on the palms, fingers, and soles, which generally persist for 7 to 10 days, and maculopapular lesions on the buttocks. Hand-foot-mouth disease is caused by viruses that belong to the _Enterovirus_ genus (group). This group of viruses includes polioviruses, coxsackieviruses, echoviruses, and enteroviruses. Enterovirus 71 has been implicated in HFMD outbreaks in Southeast Asia over the several years. EV71 is a non-polio enterovirus. Complications associated with HFMD caused by the more pathogenic EV71 strain include encephalitis, aseptic meningitis, acute flaccid paralysis, pulmonary edema or hemorrhage, and myocarditis. Most deaths in HFMD occur as a result of pulmonary edema or hemorrhage. [excerpted, edited from 26 Feb 2017  ]. Death may occur following HFMD infection as reported in MMWR 1988; 47(30); 629-32 ( ). Following the death of one 7-year-old child, autopsy findings included acute encephalomyelitis, mild interstitial pneumonitis, and pulmonary hemorrhage. No histopathologic evidence of myocarditis was detected. Neurons in areas of inflammation and tissue necrosis were positive for enterovirus 71 (EV71) using immunohistochemical staining with a monoclonal anti-EV71 antibody. This occurred in Taiwan during an outbreak in 1998 where there were approximately 90 000 reports of hand-foot-mouth disease (HFMD) among young children based on passive surveillance from sentinel physicians. Approximately 320 children [were] hospitalized with HFMD associated with suspected meningitis, encephalitis, or acute flaccid paralysis (AFP), and at least 55 died. This was the 3rd known EV71 outbreak resulting in rapid clinical deterioration and death among young children; previous outbreaks primarily among children aged less than 3 years occurred in Bulgaria during May-September 1975 (44 cases) and in Malaysia during April-June 1997 (28 cases). Maps of Thailand may be found at  and  . - Mod.LK] [", "DIPHTHERIA - VENEZUELA (02): (ZULIA) ************************************ A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Wed 21 Jun 2017 12:10 PM VET Source: El Pitazo [in Spanish, machine trans., summ., edited] The right wing of the 8th floor of the University Hospital of Maracaibo (HUM) was closed and there are 17 cases of confirmed and suspected cases of diphtheria in Maracaibo. In hospital's area of outpatient consultation, 485 employees were vaccinated on [Tue 20 Jun 2017] and remain on alert for the implications and how fast the contagion has spread. Although the majority of confirmed and suspected cases are on the 8th floor, patients are also said to be in floors 6 and 7 and they will be isolated in the coming hours. Among those infected are a 3-year-old boy, an orderly, and the secretary of the head of the Hospital Support Division who has an office on the 6th floor. Of the group, 3 are in serious condition, according to a hospital source. \"Those who work here are terrified. The critical areas are emergency, hospitalization, and laboratory, although work is being carried out normally and as a precaution, only masks are being used.\" As a recommendation, a doctor notes that to prevent diphtheria the 1st barrier method to be used is to use masks and wash hands, because there are no vaccines. \"We do not have mortality data and we can [only] talk about definitive cases when the bacteria are isolated, demonstrated by microscopy or antibodies are demonstrated in the patients' serum.\" Diphtheria: - acute infection of the nose and throat that can be easily prevented with a vaccine; - can be prevented with a vaccine; - a film of a thick gray [membrane] covers the back of the throat and makes breathing difficult; - symptoms are sore throat, fever, swollen lymph nodes, and weakness; - treatment includes the use of antibiotics and an antitoxin that neutralizes the diphtheria toxin. The vaccine exists and is available. Data: - 7000 employees work in the University Hospital and only 15 percent received the vaccine; - 2500 people visit the University Hospital of Maracaibo daily; - 17 confirmed and suspected cases have been admitted to the health center. [Byline: Sheyla Urdaneta] -- Communicated by Kathryn Soderholm [Diphtheria is a vaccine-preventable disease. Diphtheria toxoid vaccine is available combined with tetanus toxoid, both in full-strength doses (denoted by upper case letters \"DT\") in pediatric formulations and in reduced-strength dose combined with full-strength dose of tetanus toxoid (denoted by upper case T and lower case d, \"Td\") in adult formulations. These are combined with acellular or whole-cell pertussis antigens in full strength in pediatric formulations (DTaP, DTwP) or in reduced strength in the adolescent/adult-formulations (Tdap). In the United States, a total of 5 DTaP doses are recommended to be given to children, one dose each at ages 2 months, 4 months, 6 months, with booster doses at ages 15-18 months, and 4-6 years ( ). The fully immunized person who is exposed can become an asymptomatic carrier of the bacterium or develop only a mild illness. But if not fully vaccinated, the risk of getting severely ill is 30 times higher ( ). The organism that causes diphtheria, _Corynebacterium diphtheriae_, produces a toxin that is responsible both for local tissue destruction and membrane formation in the nose and throat and the major complications of myocarditis and neuritis. Diphtheria is treated with diphtheria antitoxin to stop the effects of the toxin and antibiotics to eradicate the organism. Diphtheria patients are usually kept in isolation until they are no longer contagious, that is, about 48 hours after starting antibiotics, as demonstrated by negative cultures of 2 samples obtained at least 24 hours apart after completion of antimicrobial therapy ( ). Maps of Venezuela can be seen at  and  . Maracaibo is the 2nd largest city in Venezuela, with a population of about 1.5 million residents; it is located in northwestern Venezuela, on the western shore of the strait that connects Lake Maracaibo to the Gulf of Venezuela and is the capital of the state of Zulia. - Mod.ML According to a news report dated 12 Feb 2017, at the end of last year (2016), the Venezuelan Society of Public Health and the \"Let's Defend Epidemiology\" network, reported more than 200 cases in the states of Bolivar, Monagas, Sucre, Miranda, and Anzoategui ( , in Spanish). In addition to the reports of vaccine shortages, there are also reports of anti-toxin and antibiotic shortages contributing to the outbreak ( ). - Sr.Tech.Ed.MJ/Mod.JH] [", "HAFF DISEASE - BRAZIL (03) : CLINICAL EVIDENCE ********************************************** A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Thu 15 Jun 2017 Source: Eurosurveillance Edition 2017, 22(24) [edited] [ref: Bandeira AC, Campos GS, Ribeiro GS, et al. Clinical and laboratory evidence of Haff disease -- case series from an outbreak in Salvador, Brazil, December 2016 to April 2017. Euro Surveill. 2017; 22(24): pii=30552] ---------------------------------------------------------------------- We describe a series of 15 Haff disease cases from an outbreak in Salvador, Brazil, starting early December 2016. 11 cases were grouped in 4 family clusters of 2 to 4 individuals, 4 were isolated cases. All but one patient consumed cooked fish; 11 within 24 hours before symptoms onset. Cases consumed 'Olho de Boi' (_Seriola_ spp) and 'Badejo' (_Mycteroperca_ spp). A total of 67 cases were detected, the last case was reported on 5 Apr 2017. We describe a case series of Haff disease causing an outbreak in the city of Salvador [Bahia], Brazil. The 1st case was reported on 1 Dec 2016 and here we present the clinical and epidemiological data of the 1st 15 cases of the 67 total cases detected as at 5 Apr 2017. On 14 Dec 2016, after the identification of the 1st 6 cases, the local public health authorities began an active search for new cases in the health units and hospitals in Salvador and also searched medical records to retrospectively identify cases compatible with Haff disease back to July 2016. Structured interviews were conducted with every affected patient since the beginning of the outbreak. Case definition --------------- We defined cases as patients presenting with (i) sudden onset of muscle pain in more than 2 body regions [such as] superior limbs, inferior limbs, neck/trapezium region, back region, thorax and abdominal region, not related to intense physical activity; (ii) elevated levels of creatinine phosphokinase (CPK) (more than 5-fold above the upper limit of the normal reference value of 170 U/L (that is 850 U/L) within 24 hours of presentation; and (iii) patients who recalled an ingestion of fish or fish products within 72 hours before the onset of symptoms. Laboratory investigations ------------------------- Serial measurements of muscle enzymes, such as creatine phosphokinase (CPK), aspartate aminotransferase (AST), alanine aminotransferase (ALT) and lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) were performed in all patients. In addition, troponin I levels and creatine kinase-MB (CK-MB) fractions were measured in three and two cases, respectively. We screened 10 patients for chikungunya and Zika virus RNA (serum n=4, urine n= 3, saliva n=3) given the significant circulation of both viruses in Salvador since 2015 [1,2]. RNA was extracted using QIAmp Viral RNA mini kit, according to manufacturer's instructions. Reverse transcription (RT)-PCRs were performed using standard protocols [3,4]. RT-PCR analyses were also performed for enteroviruses and parechoviruses using reagents from AccessQuick (Promega), according to standard protocols [5-8]. 13 samples (serum and faeces) from 8 patients were tested. Sequencing was performed by a sequencing facility using the ABI-Prism 3500 Genetic Analyzer (Applied Biosystems) on 40 ng of products and 2 pmol of each primer. The results were analysed with the help of the Basic Local Alignment Search Tool (BLAST). Pieces of uncooked fish ('Olho-de-Boi') from one patient were sent for toxin analysis at the Food and Drug Administration (FDA), in the United States (US), through the Brazilian Ministry of Health. Outbreak description -------------------- The outbreak started on 1 Dec 2016 with a family cluster of 4 patients who presented to the emergency department (ED) within less than 24 hours with sudden onset of muscle pain in different body parts, initiated at the trapezium area, and followed by dark urine in 2. They all had consumed the same fish products 12 to 72 hours before symptoms onset and all had highly elevated muscle enzymes, compatible with rhabdomyolysis. 8 days later, 2 other non-linked family clusters of 3 and 2 individuals, respectively, came within hours to the ED with a similar history of ingestion of fish and symptoms of rhabdomyolysis. Within each cluster, all patients had consumed the same fish. During the following 3 weeks, 3 more cases (comprising another family cluster of 2 cases) presented the same symptoms, had the same history of fish ingestion, summing up to 12 cases by 28 Dec 2016. In January 2017, 3 further cases were diagnosed, adding up to the 15 cases studied in detail and presented here. The majority of the 15 cases of Haff disease reported here clustered between the epidemiological week 48 and 51 of 2016 [26-30 Dec 2016], however, new cases continued to be reported up to epidemiological week 14 of 2017 [week ending 7 Apr 2017] (Figure; available at the source URL above]). After the recognition of the outbreak in December 2016, local health authorities started an active search for cases and they identified similar cases admitted to local hospitals in Salvador back in July 2016. In the original article there is a figure showing graphically the case series of reported cases of Haff disease according to the epidemiological week of symptoms onset, Salvador, Brazil, 1 Dec 2016-31 Jan 2017 (n=15) and of those where Haff disease cases identified retrospectively and prospectively after recognition of the outbreak. The median age of the 1st 15 cases was 43 years (range: 14-75), there were slightly more men (n=9) than women (n=6), and all cases reported sudden onset of muscle pain, particularly, pain in the neck or trapezium regions was reported by 14 patients. 8 patients reported dark urine compatible with myoglobinuria and a mild rash was seen in 4. At initial medical care or during hospitalisation, none of the cases presented with fever, arthralgia, respiratory, or gastrointestinal symptoms, except for 2 patients who reported transient loose stools. 6 patients had comorbidities. 13 patients were hospitalised with a median hospital stay of 3 days. Clinical and demographic variables are shown in Table 1. Table 1 Demographic and clinical characteristics of cases in outbreak of Haff disease, Salvador, Brazil, 1 Dec 2016-31 Jan 2017 (n=15) Characteristics / Number or median (range) Male / 9 Age, years / 43 (14-75) Symptoms/signs at 1st medical care (a) Neck/trapezium pain / 14 Arms pain / 14 Thighs or legs pain / 13 Back pain / 10 Thoracic pain / 2 Abdominal pain / 2 Throat pain / 1 Muscle weakness / 6 Fever / 0 Rash / 4 Dark urine / 8 Vital signs SBP, mmHg (b) / 146 (110-168) DBP, mmHg (b) / 79 (60-89) Heart rate, bpm (b) / 74 (60-97) Comorbidities (b) Arterial hypertension / 1 Hyperlipidaemia / 2 Type II diabetes mellitus / 1 Chronic atrial fibrillation / 1 Depression / 2 Hypothyroidism / 1 Patients on statin therapy / 2 Outcome Hospitalisation / 13 Acute kidney injury / 2 Death / 0 Bpm: beats per minute; DBP: diastolic blood pressure; SBP: systolic blood pressure. (a) Patients may present with more than one comorbidity or symptom/signs. (b) Data available for 11 patients. CPK levels at presentation ranged from 743 to 105 755 U/L and decreased rapidly on subsequent days in parallel with the improvement of symptoms. Troponin I levels were less than 0.034 ng/mL in all patients with measurements. CK-MB fraction ranged from 1.9 percent to 6.3 percent. RT-PCR for chikungunya and Zika viruses, as well as nested RT-PCR for parechovirus, yielded negative results for all patients in all types of samples. The RT-PCR for enterovirus generated non-specific products in four samples. However, upon analysis of the sequenced fragments no virus could be identified. Epidemiological links, food consumption history and symptom onset ----------------------------------------------------------------- In the interviews, patients were asked about possible links to other cases, fish consumption and the timely relation to symptom onset. 11 cases were grouped in 4 family clusters of 2 to 4 individuals and 4 were isolated cases. One limitation of the present study is that we did not investigate all family members to determine the attack rates within clusters. Table 2 shows the clustering pattern for the cases, as well as the species of fish consumed by each of them, and the time elapsed between fish ingestion and symptom onset. All but one case had consumed cooked fish. Time between consumption and onset of symptoms ranged between 2 to 5 and 72 hours. Of the 14 cases who reported fish consumption, 11 had ingested fish within 24 hours before symptoms onset. Table 2 Case clustering, species of fish consumed, and time elapsed between fish ingestion and initial symptoms onset for case series of Haff disease patients, Salvador, Brazil, 1 December 2016-31 January 2017 (n=15) Case number / Cluster number / Type of fish consumed / Time elapsed between fish ingestion and symptoms onset Case 1 / Cluster 1 / A\u2009+\u2009B / 48-72 hours Case 2 / Cluster 1 / A\u2009+\u2009B / 48-72 hours Case 3 / Cluster 1 / A\u2009+\u2009B / 12-24 hours Case 4 / Cluster 1 / A\u2009+\u2009B / 48-72 hours Case 5 / Cluster 2 / B / 21 hours Case 6 / Cluster 2 / B / 11 hours Case 7 / Cluster 2 / B / 7 hours Case 8 / Cluster 3 / A / 12 hours Case 9 / Cluster 3 / A / 13 hours Case 10 / No cluster / B / 10 hours Case 11 / Cluster 4 / Unknown (a) 7 hours Case 12 / Cluster 4 / Unknown (a) / 6 hours Case 13 / No cluster / A / 10 hours Case 14 / No cluster / None (b) / NA Case 15 / No cluster / A / 2-5 hours A: 'Olho de Boi' (_Seriola_ spp.); B: 'Badejo' (_Mycteroperca_ spp); NA: not available. (a) Unknown type of fish consumed. (b) Case 14 reportedly did not consume fish, but ate local Afro-Brazilian food, which might have fish by-products used in its preparation. The species of seawater fish consumed were 'Olho de Boi' (_Seriola_ spp) and 'Badejo' (_Mycteroperca_ spp). One case had reportedly not eaten fish, but eaten a local Afro-Brazilian dish with possible fish by-products used in its preparation within 24 hours of symptoms onset. Analysis of the fish sample by the FDA revealed no toxins or heavy metal contamination. Background ---------- Cases of Haff disease were first described in 1924, in the Baltic region of Prussia and Sweden and involved the consumption of different cooked freshwater fish, such as burbot (_Lota lota_), pike (_Esox_ sp.) and freshwater eel (_Anguilla anguilla_) [9]. In the US, the 1st cases of Haff disease were reported in Texas in 1984, and hereafter the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) reported 6 additional cases of Haff disease in patients from California and Missouri, who had eaten buffalo fish [10]. In 2001, 2 cases were identified in North Carolina who had eaten baked Atlantic salmon [11] and in 2014, further individual case reports were published, both cases developed symptoms after the ingestion of buffalo fish [12,13]. In 2010, China reported cases associated with the ingestion of crayfish [14]. In Brazil, an outbreak of 27 cases of Haff disease occurred during 4 months in the northern state of Amazonas in 2008 [15] and an additional case from the Amazon region was reported in 2013 [16]. It is considered that the condition is due to an unknown toxin in the aquatic food chain. Discussion --------- We describe a cases series in an outbreak of Haff disease in Salvador that involved 15 patients as at 31 Jan 2017 with the majority of them clustered in families. An earlier outbreak of Haff disease in our country was reported in the Amazon region in 2009. It was related to ingestion of 3 different species of freshwater fish present in the Amazonian rivers [15] and authors identified the same pattern of family clusters as observed by us [15]. An important limitation of case series is the methodological limitation concerning risk factor analysis and the control of possible confounders. However, the sudden onset of similar symptoms in family clusters, a few hours after consumption of the same food, point to a common exposure. The absence of fever and gastrointestinal symptoms and laboratory signs of infection (data not shown) led us to hypothesise an ingested toxin as the cause. Given the universal ingestion of fish or its by-products by all cases and the compatibility with the described Haff syndrome, we considered a fish toxin as the most probable cause of illness in our case series. After its recognition, 7 cases of Haff disease were retrospectively identified back to July 2016, and 60 cases have been reported since 1 Dec 2016, totalling 67 cases reported in this outbreak until now. The last case was reported on 5 Apr 2017 [17]. 'Olho de Boi' (_Seriola_ spp) and 'Badejo' (_Mycteroperca_ spp) are seawater fish. Palytoxin is a toxic substance present in some soft corals (_Palythoa_ sp.) and analogues were also isolated from dinoflagellates of the genus _Ostreopsis_ that are vastly distributed in tropical water throughout the world, including the coast of Brazil [18]. Our patients did not present with typical manifestations of palytoxin intoxication, that is chest pain, shortness of breath, wheezing, tachycardia, although 2 patients reported episodes of loose stools (diarrhoea may occur in palytoxin intoxication) and all had myalgia and rhabdomyolysis, a common feature of palytoxin intoxication related to the Na+-K+-ATPase binding effect. Samples of fish consumed by one of our patients were analysed for ciguatoxin by the FDA with negative results. This is not surprising in the face of the difficulty in isolating the aetiological toxin involved. In 21 similar cases in the US, where samples of suspected fish or seafood were tested by the CDC or the FDA, all were negative for different aquatic toxins, including ciguatoxin, saxitoxin, brevetoxin, tetrodotoxin, palytoxin, and cyanobacterial toxins [19]. It is important for travel medicine physicians to be alert in case of patients returning from Salvador, Brazil, with myalgia and symptoms of rhabdomyolysis to consider Haff disease as a possible differential diagnosis. Care should also be taken when treating these patients so as to avoid non-steroidal anti-inflammatory agents because of possible concurrent renal toxicity [20]. References ---------- 1. Cardoso CW, Paploski IA, Kikuti M, Rodrigues MS, Silva MM, Campos GS, et al. Outbreak of Exanthematous Illness Associated with Zika, Chikungunya, and Dengue Viruses, Salvador, Brazil. Emerg Infect Dis. 2015;21(12):2274-6. DOI: 10.3201/eid2112.151167 PMID: 26584464 2. Cardoso CW, Kikuti M, Prates APPB, Paploski IAD, Tauro LB, Silva MMO, et al. Unrecognized Emergence of Chikungunya Virus during a Zika Virus Outbreak in Salvador, Brazil. PLoS Negl Trop Dis. 2017;11(1):e0005334. DOI: 10.1371/journal.pntd.0005334 PMID: 28114414 3. Edwards CJ, Welch SR, Chamberlain J, et cols. Molecular diagnosis and analysis of Chikungunya virus. J Clin Virol 2007; (39): 271-275. 4. Balm MND, Lee CK, Lee HK, Chiu L, Koay ES, Tang JW. A diagnostic polymerase chain reaction assay for Zika virus.J Med Virol. 2012;84(9):1501-5. DOI: 10.1002/jmv.23241 PMID: 22825831 5. Thoelen I, Lemey P, Van Der Donck I, Beuselinck K, Lindberg AM, Van Ranst M. Molecular typing and epidemiology of enteroviruses identified from an outbreak of aseptic meningitis in Belgium during the summer of 2000.J Med Virol. 2003;70(3):420-9. DOI: 10.1002/jmv.10412 PMID: 12767006 6. Nix WA, Oberste MS, Pallansch MA. Sensitive, seminested PCR amplification of VP1 sequences for direct identification of all enterovirus serotypes from original clinical specimens.J Clin Microbiol. 2006;44(8):2698-704. DOI: 10.1128/JCM.00542-06 PMID: 16891480 7. Oberste MS, Maher K, Pallansch MA. Specific detection of echoviruses 22 and 23 in cell culture supernatants by RT-PCR.J Med Virol. 1999;58(2):178-81. DOI: 10.1002/(SICI)1096-9071(199906)58:2 3.0.CO;2-Q PMID: 10335867 8. Mizuta K, Kuroda M, Kurimura M, Yahata Y, Sekizuka T, Aoki Y, et al. Epidemic myalgia in adults associated with human parechovirus type 3 infection, Yamagata, Japan, 2008. Emerg Infect Dis. 2012;18(11):1787-93. DOI: 10.3201/eid1811.111570 PMID: 23095469 9. Zu Jeddeloh B. Haffkrankheit. [Haff disease]. Ergebnisse in der inneren Medizin. 1939;57:138-82. German. 10. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). Haff disease associated with eating buffalo fish--United States, 1997.MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep. 1998;47(50):1091-3.PMID: 9883771 11. Langley RL, Bobbitt WH. Haff disease after eating salmon.South Med J. 2007;100(11):1147-50. DOI: 10.1097/SMJ.0b013e3181583673 PMID: 17984750 12. Herman LL, Bies C. Haff disease: rhabdomyolysis after eating buffalo fish.West J Emerg Med. 2014;15(6):664-6. DOI: 10.5811/westjem.2014.6.10.21794 PMID: 25247039 13. Paul V, Shamah S, Garankina O, Wolf L, Shia Lin Y. Rhabdomyolysis after fish consumption: Haff's disease.QJM. 2014;107(1):67-8. DOI: 10.1093/qjmed/hct172 PMID: 23970182 14. Zhang B, Yang G, Yu X, Mao H, Xing C, Liu J. Haff disease after eating crayfish in east China.Intern Med. 2012;51(5):487-9. DOI: 10.2169/internalmedicine.51.6786 PMID: 22382564 15. dos Santos MC, de Albuquerque BC, Pinto RC, Aguiar GP, Lescano AG, Santos JH, et al. Outbreak of Haff disease in the Brazilian Amazon. Rev Panam Salud Publica. 2009;26(5):469-70. DOI: 10.1590/S1020-49892009001100012 PMID: 20107699 16. Tolesani J\u00fanior O, Roderjan CN, do Carmo Neto E, Ponte MM, Seabra MCP, Knibel MF. Haff disease associated with the ingestion of the freshwater fish Mylossoma duriventre (pacu-manteiga).Rev Bras Ter Intensiva. 2013;25(4):348-51.PMID: 24553518 17. Boletim Epidemiol\u00f3gico. Secretaria Municipal de Sa\u00fade de Salvador. Mialgia aguda a esclarecer em Salvador. January, 24, 2017. 18. Botana LM. Seafood and freshwater toxins. Pharmacology, physiology, and detection. 2nd edition. CRC Press, Taylor and Francis group, USA. 2008. 19. Diaz JH. Global incidence of rhabdomyolysis after cooked seafood consumption (Haff disease).Clin Toxicol (Phila). 2015;53(5):421-6. DOI: 10.3109/http://promedmail.org/post/15563650.2015.1016165 PMID: 25789572 20. Kim SY, Moon A. Drug-induced nephrotoxicity and its biomarkers.Biomol Ther (Seoul). 2012;20(3):268-72. DOI: 10.4062/biomolther.2012.20.3.268 PMID: 24130922 -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail [In late 2016 ProMED-mail posted what was suspected to be an outbreak of Haff disease in Brazil. This is a more in-depth look at that situation which does identify it as Haff disease. - Mod.TG A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  .] [", "AVIAN INFLUENZA (116): SOUTH AFRICA (MPUMALANGA), FINLAND (TAMPERE REGION), H5N8, H5, POULTRY, WILD, OIE ******************************************************************************************************** A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases In this posting: [1] South Africa (Mpumalanga): poultry, HPAI H5N8 [2] Finland (Tampere Region): wild bird, HPAI H5 ****** [1] South Africa (Mpumalanga): poultry, HPAI H5N8 Date: Thu 22 Jun 2017 Source: OIE, WAHID (World Animal Health Information Database), weekly disease information 2017; 30(30) [edited] Highly pathogenic avian influenza, South Africa ----------------------------------------------- Information received on [and dated] 22 Jun 2017 from Dr Bothle Michael Modisane, Chief Director, Department of Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries, Animal Production and Health, Pretoria, South Africa Summary Report type: immediate notification Date of start of the event: 19 Jun 2017 Date of confirmation of the event: 22 Jun 2017 Reason for notification: new strain of a listed disease in the country Causal agent: Avian influenza virus Serotype: H5N8 Nature of diagnosis: clinical, laboratory (advanced) This event pertains to a defined zone within the country New outbreaks (1) Summary of outbreaks Total outbreaks: 1 Outbreak 1 (AI_H5N8_2017): AI_H5N8_2017, Dipaleseng, Mpumalanga Date of start of the outbreak: 19 Jun 2017 Outbreak status: continuing (or date resolved not provided) Epidemiological unit: farm Total animals affected: Species / Susceptible / Cases / Deaths / Killed and disposed of / Slaughtered Birds / 24 000 / 5000 / 5000 / 0 / 0 Affected population: Commercial broiler breeder farm. Process has started to cull remainder of birds. Outbreak statistics [rates apparent, expressed as percentages] Species / Morbidity rate / Mortality rate / Case fatality rate / Proportion susceptible animals lost* Birds / 20.83 / 20.83 / 100 / 100 *Removed from the susceptible population through death, destruction, and/or slaughter Epidemiology Source of the outbreak(s) or origin of infection: unknown or inconclusive Epidemiological comments: coordinates modified to protect confidentiality as required by South African Legislation. Control measures Measures applied: surveillance within containment and/or protection zone, traceability, quarantine, vaccination prohibited, no treatment of affected animals Measures to be applied: official destruction of animal products, official disposal of carcasses, by-products and waste, stamping out, disinfection Diagnostic test results Laboratory name and type / Species / Test / Test date / Result Agricultural Research Council - Onderstepoort Veterinary Institute (ARC-OVI) (OIE reference laboratory) / Birds / polymerase chain reaction (PCR) / 22 Jun 2017 / Positive Future reporting The event is continuing. Weekly follow-up reports will be submitted. [The location of the outbreak can be seen on the interactive map included in the OIE report at the source URL above.] -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail [According to the media, \"2 individual cases of bird flu [avian influenza] have been reported in Mpumalanga and the Free State. An outbreak of a highly pathogenic H5N8 bird flu [avian influenza] at a farm in the Free State province was also confirmed by the agricultural industry body group, AgriSA, on [23 Jun 2017].\" ( ) \"South Africa earlier this month [June 2017] suspended all trade in birds and chicken products from neighboring Zimbabwe after it reported an outbreak of the H5N8 bird flu [avian influenza] at a commercial poultry farm.\" ( ). - Mod.CRD] ****** [2] Finland (Tampere Region): wild bird, HPAI H5 Date: Thu 22 Jun 2017 Source: OIE, WAHID (World Animal Health Information Database), weekly disease information 2017; 30(30) [edited] Highly pathogenic influenza A viruses (infection with) (non-poultry and wild birds), Finland ---------------------------------------------------------------------- Information received on [and dated] 22 Jun 2017 from Dr Taina Aaltonen, chief veterinary officer and deputy director general, Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry, Helsinki, Finland Summary Report type: immediate notification (final report) Date of start of the event: 26 May 2017 Date of confirmation of the event: 2 Jun 2017 Reason for notification: reoccurrence of a listed disease Date of previous occurrence: 27 Apr 2017 Manifestation of disease: clinical disease Causal agent: highly pathogenic influenza A virus Serotype: H5 Nature of diagnosis: laboratory (advanced) This event pertains to a defined zone within the country New outbreaks (1) Summary of outbreaks Total outbreaks: 1 Outbreak 1: Sastamala, Lansi-Ja Si Sisa-Suomi [western region/Tampere region] Date of start of the outbreak: 26 May 2017 Outbreak status: resolved 22 Jun 2017 Epidemiological unit: not applicable Total animals affected Species / Susceptible / Cases / Deaths / Killed and disposed of / Slaughtered Whooper Swan: _Cygnus cygnus_ (Anatidae) / - / 1 / 0 / 1 / - Epidemiology Source of the outbreak(s) or origin of infection: unknown or inconclusive. Control measures Measures applied: screening; vaccination prohibited; no treatment of affected animals Measures to be applied: no other measures Diagnostic test results Laboratory name and type: Finnish Food Safety Authority Evira (national laboratory) Species / Test / Test date / Result Whooper swan / real-time reverse transcriptase/polymerase chain reaction (RRT-PCR) / 31 May 2017 / Positive Whooper swan / reverse transcription/polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) / 1 Jun 2017 / Positive Whooper swan / virus isolation / 21 Jun 2017 / Negative Whooper swan / virus sequencing / 2 Jun 2017 / Positive Future reporting The event is continuing. Weekly follow-up reports will be submitted. [The location of the outbreak can be seen on the interactive map included in the OIE report at the source URL above.] -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail [On 8 Apr 2017 Finland reported 2 cases of HPAI H5N8 in white-tailed eagles. The event was resolved on 27 Apr 2017. See event summary and map at See H5N8 HPAI outbreaks officially reported in Asia, Europe, and Africa by date of onset, since 1 Jan 2017 at (last update on 6 Jun 2017). - Mod.CRD] [", "TULAREMIA - USA (06): (COLORADO) WILD RABBIT ******************************************** A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Thu 22 Jun 2017 12:20 PM MDT Source: News Channel 13 abc [edited] A wild rabbit found in the northeast part of Colorado Springs has died of tularemia infection, also known as rabbit fever, according to El Paso County Public Health. The rabbit was tested after someone recently found several dead rabbits near a property off Austin Bluffs Parkway and Stetson Hills Boulevard. So far, there have not been reports of human tularemia infection. Signs of infection in people include fever, chills, headache, muscle aches, chest pain, and coughing. Tularemia can be treated with antibiotics. If you have any of these early signs, contact your doctor. Tularemia most often happens by an infected insect bite, most commonly ticks and deer flies. El Paso County Public Health is asking residents to keep an eye out on wild animals for your safety as well as your children and pets. If you do spot a dead, wild animal there are steps you should take to dispose of it. [Byline: Holly Morrison] -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts [There have been reports of Tularemia in rabbits in CO a few weeks ago. Tularemia is largely confined to the Northern Hemisphere and is not normally found in the tropics or the Southern Hemisphere. _Francisella tularensis subsp. tularensis_(Type A) is associated with lagomorphs (rabbits and hares) in North America. It is transmitted primarily by ticks and biting flies, and is highly virulent for humans and domestic rabbits. In addition to vector transmission, tularemia may be spread by contact with infected animals or environmental fomites, by inhalation, or by ingestion of the poorly cooked flesh of infected animals, or contaminated water. - Mod.PMB A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  .] [", "CHIKUNGUNYA (20): ASIA (PAKISTAN) ********************************* A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Thu 22 Jun 2017 Source: The News [edited] At least 66 new cases of the Chikungunya viral fever have been detected in Karachi within a span of 6 days, with 22 of them being reported in District Malir, as per a report released by the Sindh Health Department on [Wed 21 Jun 2017]. According to the report, 66 more cases of the vector-borne ailment of Chikungunya surfaced from June 12 to 17 [2017] in Karachi, taking the patients toll to 3190 in the metropolitan this year [2017]. It said 22 cases were reported from Malir, 2 from District East and 42 from District West. Out of the 298 samples tested for disease diagnosis at the National Institute of Health Islamabad, 246 were found positive for Chikungunya, the report added. Chikungunya is a mosquito-borne, non-lethal viral disease caused by a species of mosquitoes called _Aedes aegypti_, which also carry the dengue and zika viruses. According to experts, the chikungunya virus causes fever and severe joint pain, while other symptoms include muscle pain, headache, nausea, fatigue and rashes. A 9-member delegation of the World Health Organization also visited Karachi in May this year [2017] to help health authorities prevent the Chikungunya disease from spreading in the metropolis. -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail [Based on the recent report from the Regional Disease Surveillance and Response Unit (RDSRU), from 19 Dec 2016 to 11 June 2017, 3514 suspected cases of chikungunya were identified and registered, using the following WHO recommended case definition in the different towns of Karachi: \"A person with acute onset of fever (102 deg F/39 deg C) and severe arthralgia or arthritis not explained by other medical conditions, and who resides or has visited epidemic or endemic areas within 2 weeks before the onset of symptoms.\" According to the available data (up to 16 Apr 2017), cases continue to be reported. Total 298 samples were taken and sent to National Institute of Health (NIH), Islamabad for Laboratory confirmation of diagnosis. Out of these, 246 samples were found positive for chikungunya virus on RT-PCR. The total suspected case numbers mentioned in the news report above are lower than the figures shared by RDSRU Sindh. The following actions are being taken by the health department in Sindh; 1. Division level coordination meetings have been conducted in Karachi in order to develop an action plan using integrated approach 2. All District and Town Health officers have been instructed to take measures for prevention and treatment of Chikungunya fever. 3. Information, Education and Communication activities:  - Pamphlets containing information about the disease printed in local languages and distributed to all the Hospitals and Primary Health Centers in the areas.  - Posters and advertisements in local languages were also issued 4. Capacity building of District Health Officers and focal person is being carried out with the support of RDSRU of FELTP Pakistan 5. Indoor insecticide Residual Spraying and fumigation conducted in high risk areas. 6. Anti-larval measures carried out. ProMED-mail thanks Dr Muhammad Asif Syed, Provincial Technical Officer the Regional Disease Surveillance and Response Unit, Karachi, Sindh, for the information above on the chikungunya outbreak. - Mod.UBA A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  .] [", "MUMPS UPDATE (21): USA (OREGON, HAWAII, CALIFORNIA) EUROPE (UK) *************************************************************** A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases In this update: USA --- [1] Oregon (Union County) [2] Oregon (Jackson County) [3] Hawaii (Oahu) [4] California (Los Angeles County) Europe --- [5] UK (London) ****** USA --- [1] Oregon (Union County) Date: Mon 12 Jun 2017 11:26 AM PDT Source: The Observer [edited] The [Oregon] Center for Human Development [CHD] announced [Mon 12 Jun 2017] there are 4 confirmed cases of mumps in Union County and 5 presumptive cases. The presumptive cases involve people who are displaying mumps symptoms but have not yet been confirmed by lab tests, according to Andi Walsh, community relations and emergency preparedness coordinator for the CHD. People of all ages are contracting the disease. \"It is not just a children's disease. It is affecting the entire community,\" Walsh said. The CHD is encouraging people to get vaccinated. \"We're asking all residents to get a mumps vaccine unless they have already received 2 doses of the vaccine,\" Connie Carter, public health communicable disease nurse at CHD, said. Most individuals who contract mumps will have a mild illness that lasts a week or so, but some people may have more serious outcomes. \"Those outcomes include testicular swelling, hearing loss, swelling around the brain and spinal cord or brain damage,\" Carter said. Though officials are urging county residents to get vaccinated against the virus, the vaccine might not work as well for some people, so having as many qualified individuals who are healthy enough to receive the vaccination is important. \"Having high vaccine rates in the community also protects those who can't be vaccinated because they are too young or have a health condition that prevents it,\" Carter said. Meanwhile, officials are working on pinpointing where the disease in Union County originated, but according to Carrie Brogoitti, public health administrator with CHD, the extensive investigation will take time. While it may never be known how mumps came to the county, public health workers want residents to know what the symptoms are and how the disease is contracted so they can protect themselves and their families. Symptoms of mumps include puffy cheeks and a swollen jaw. Other indicators of the virus include fever, headache, muscle aches, tiredness, and loss of appetite, according to the news release. The 1st symptoms typically appear 16 to 18 days after infection and up to 25 days after initial contact. \"Some people may not have signs of illness. If you think that you have the mumps, stay away from others,\" Carter said. \"Do not show up at the emergency room or your health care provider's office. Instead, call your provider and ask what you should do next.\" The communicable disease is spread easily through fluids from the mouth, nose, or throat. It can spread two days before signs of the illness appear, and up to 5 days after the swelling begins. An infected person can spread the virus by coughing, sneezing, talking, or sharing items such as cups or eating utensils with others and touching objects or surfaces with unwashed hands that are then touched by others, according to the release. Health officials are warning that if someone thinks they might have contracted the mumps, then they should stay away from others. Health officials are also encouraging anyone who thinks they might be infected to not show up at an emergency room or a health care provider's office. Health officials are urging anyone who believes they may have mumps to call their primary provider and ask for instructions, according to the release. -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail ****** [2] Oregon (Jackson County) Date: Fri 16 Jun 2017 Source: KTVL [edited] Jackson County [Oregon] Public Health officials say they're noticing a spike of mumps cases across the state. Locally, Jackson County has only had 1 confirmed case this year [2017]. Mumps is a vaccine-preventable disease, usually given to children at a year and then between the ages of 4 and 6 years old. Symptoms include fever, headache, and most notably swollen salivary glands. Public health officials said all diagnosed cases are reported to the county, so they prevent the illness from spreading. \"Anytime we see something greater than the expected it keeps everybody busy. You're doing a lot of investigating trying to figure out why you are seeing an increase in whatever disease or virus it could be,\" said Tanya Phillips with Jackson County Public Health. If there are complications from mumps it can lead to inflammation around the brain or deafness. [Byline: Megan Allison] -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail [The state of Oregon can be located on the HealthMap/ProMED-mail interactive map at . A county map can be seen at . - Sr.Tech.Ed.MJ] ****** [3] Hawaii (Oahu) Date: Sat 17 Jun 2017 Source: Outbreak News Today [edited] The Hawaii State Department of Health (DOH) has confirmed 8 additional cases this week [week of 17 Jun 2017] of Oahu residents with the mumps, pushing the total number of cases this year to 104. On Tue 13 Jun 2017, 3 new cases were confirmed and involved 2 adults and 1 child. None of the cases required hospitalization and all 3 are recovering. An additional 5 cases were confirmed today [17 Jun 2017], involving 1 adult and 4 children, none of whom required hospitalization. DOH expects the current mumps outbreak to continue and the investigation of new cases is ongoing. The MMR [measles, mumps, rubella] vaccine provides the best protection against the disease. 2 doses of the vaccine are 88 percent effective at protecting against mumps and 1 dose is 78 percent effective. Being fully vaccinated can help protect loved ones, family members, friends, classmates, and coworkers. -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail [The state of Hawaii can be located on the HealthMap/ProMED-mail interactive map at . - Sr.Tech.Ed.MJ] ****** [4] California (Los Angeles County) Date: Tue 20 Jun 2017 00:16 PDT Source: Norcal News [edited] A sudden mumps outbreak in Los Angeles County [California] has now infected 42 people, and many of those are living on the Westside. Nationally, mumps has been a major problem in recent years. There were 5833 cases nationwide last year [2016], and that number seems to be rising this year. As of May [2017], there have been 3176 nationwide cases this year, on pace to exceed last year's comfortably. Some vaccinated individuals have been affected, with the majority of cases being found in places where people are kept in closed quarters, such as college campuses. The MMR vaccine, designed to protect against mumps among other diseases, does not seem to be covering it. The vaccine's effectiveness is not really in question, but there are thoughts of adding additional doses. Now, doses are given when children are about 1 year of age and then again before school age. The vaccine may wane before adulthood is reached. Some, like military members, are given additional doses of the vaccine in basic training, but the general population does not receive a booster. Research has shone that it may be just a blip though. Most of those infected intermingle. Most of the cases have been seen on campuses, in bars, nightclubs, or other similar places. People infected tend to have the same social networks. It is recommended that you limit contact with affected individuals. Do not share drinks. Avoid shaking hands. Make sure to wash your hands often. If you are infected, you should limit your contact with other people until you're better and should see a doctor immediately to start your treatment. Please be courteous to others and try not to spread the virus around. Regardless of this blip, the national incidence of mumps is down more than 99 percent since before the introduction of the MMR vaccine, so these numbers are nothing too much to worry about. It's just important that everyone take the proper precautions to avoid getting infected, especially if you live in an outbreak area. -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts [The state of California can be located on the HealthMap/ProMED-mail interactive map at . Los Angeles County can be seen on the map at  . - Sr.Tech.Ed.MJ] ****** Europe --- [5] UK (London) Date: Thu 15 Jun 2017 Source: KCW Today [edited] There has been a dramatic rise in reported cases of mumps, particularly in teenagers and young adults across London, public health officials warned. Public Health England (PHE), alongside the NHS, are investigating after nearly 450 cases were reported between [1 Jan-30 May 2017]. This is an increase of 150 cases compared to the same 5-month period in 2016. The City of Westminster had the lowest infection rate with only 8 cases, with 15 reported in Kensington and Chelsea. This news comes in tandem with data that show that cases of measles have also sky-rocketed in London and the South East last year [2017], reaching the highest number since the last outbreak in 2012 (which saw 3873 cases across England and Wales). There were a total of 60 cases recorded in 2016 (there were 382 in 2012), compared to just 4 in 2015. London and the South West were the only 2 regions to record more cases of the viral infection last year [2016]. The upturn in both mumps and measles can be traced to the falling numbers of children undergoing the MMR vaccine. The World Health Organisation has set a target of 95 percent, but vaccination rates have fallen to 91.9 percent. This recent fall has followed years of broadly rising coverage since the MMR controversy, when the vaccine was linked to autism in a now-discredited paper in 1998 by Andrew Wakefield. -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts [A map of the United Kingdom can be found at The mumps virus is an RNA virus belonging to the genus _Rubulavirus_ in the family Paramyxovirus. According to the CDC, mumps cases can range from roughly a couple hundred to a couple thousand. Before the U.S. mumps vaccination program started in 1967, about 186 000 cases were reported each year. Since the pre-vaccine era, there has been a more than 99 percent decrease in mumps cases in the United States. However, this past year has seen a upswing in the number of mumps cases. MMR (Measles, mumps, rubella) vaccine prevents most, but not all, cases of mumps and complications caused by the disease. 2 doses of the vaccine are 88 percent (range: 66 to 95 percent) effective at protecting against mumps; one dose is 78 percent (range: 49 percent to 92 percent) effective. It is important that children get vaccinated since the disease can be more severe in adults. While some people who get mumps have very mild or no symptoms, and often they do not know they have the disease, and most people with mumps recover completely in a few weeks, symptoms can be serious. Complications may include infections of the coverings of the brain (15 percent), pancreatitis (4 percent), permanent deafness, and painful testicular swelling which uncommonly results in infertility. Women may develop ovarian swelling but this does not increase the risk of infertility. - Mod.LK] [", "ZIKA VIRUS (14): AMERICAS, ASIA, RESEARCH, OBSERVATIONS ******************************************************* A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases In this update: [1] Cases in various countries: Americas Americas cumulative case numbers Cases in various countries not mentioned above or more recent case numbers. Asia --- Singapore Imported cases with little or no possibility of ongoing mosquito transmission --- South Korea USA:  - Case numbers mainland  - Territories and Commonwealth [2] _Aedes vexans_ as vectors [3] _Aedes aegypti_, _Aedes albopictus_ and _Culex quinquefasciatus_ competence as virus vectors [4] _Aedes aegypti_ and _Ae. albopictus_ distribution change in the USA [5] Early virus circulation in Brazil [6] Virus in various mosquito species [7] Virus strain and vector competence [8] Virus in fetal tissue ****** [1] Cases in various countries WHO Tool Kit for the care and support of people affected by complications associated with Zika virus is available at Americas --- Americas cumulative case numbers As of 23 Jun 2017 Country / Locally acquired: suspected / Confirmed /Imported / Deaths / Conf. Congenital Syndrome North America: Bermuda / 0 / 0 / 6 / 0 / 0 Canada / 0 / 0 / 507 / 0 / 1 USA / 0 / 225 / 5030 / 0 / 80 Latin America: Mexico / 0 / 8842 / 15 / 0 / 5 Central American Isthmus: Belize / 1294 / 206 / 0 / 0 / 0 Costa Rica / 6468 / 1824 / 32 / 0 / 6 El Salvador / 11 557 / 51 / 0 / 0 / 4 Guatemala / 3686 / 966 / 0 / 0 / 140 Honduras / 32 130 / 302 / 0 / 0 / 4 Nicaragua / 0 / 2060 / 3 / 0 / 2 Panama / 4307 / 985 / 42 / 0 / 9 Latin Caribbean: Cuba / 0 / 187/ 58 / 0 / 0 Dominican Republic / 4906 / 345 / 0 / 0 / 93 French Guiana / 10 500 / 483 / 10 / 0 / 1 Guadeloupe / 30 845 / 382 / 0 / 0 / 5 Haiti / 2955 / 5 / 0 / 0 / 1 Martinique / 36 680 / 21 / 0 / 0 / 7 Puerto Rico / 0 / 40 374 / 137 / 5 / 42 Saint Barthelemy / 990 / 61 / 0 / 0 / 0 Saint Martin / 3280 / 200 / 0 / 0 / 0 Non-Latin Caribbean: Anguilla / 31 / 23 / 1/ 0 / 0 Antigua and Barbuda / 465 / 14 / 2 / 0 / 0 Aruba / 1208 / 681 / 7 / 0 / 0 Bahamas / 440 / 25 / 3/ 0 / 0 Barbados / 705 / 150 / 0 / 0 / 1 Bonaire, St Eustatius and Saba / 235 / 437 / 0 / 0 / 0 Caymans / 232 / 31 / 10 / 0 / 0 Curacao / 2589 / 1259 / 0 / 0 / 0 Dominica / 1154 / 79 / 0 / 0 / 0 Grenada / 335 / 118 / 0 / 0 / 2 Guyana / 0 / 37 / 0 / 0 / 0 Jamaica / 7650 / 203 / 0 / 0 / 0 Montserrat / 18 / 5 / 0 / 0 / 0 Saint Kits and Nevis / 554/ 33 / 0 / 0 / 0 Saint Lucia / 822 / 50 / 0 / 0 / 0 Saint Vincent and the Grenadines / 508 / 83 / 0 / 0 / 0 Sint Maarten / 253 / 149 / 0 / 0 / 0 Suriname / 2768 / 724 / 0 / 4 / 4 Trinidad and Tobago / 0 / 718 / 1 / 0 / 3 Turks and Caicos / 200 / 25 / 3 / 0 / 0 Virgin Islands (UK) / 74 / 53 / 0 / 0 / 0 Virgin Islands (USA) / 1138 / 1018/ 2 / 0 / 0 Andean Area: Bolivia / 2288 / 712 / 4 / 0 / 14 Colombia / 98 199 / 9802 / 0 / 0 / 166 Ecuador / 3842 / 1848 / 15 / 0 / 5 Peru / 6128 / 1283 / 22 / 0 / 0 Venezuela / 59 965 / 2413 / 0 / 0 / 0 [Brazil and] Southern Cone: Brazil / 224 670 / 134 057 / 0 / 11 / 2775 Argentina / 869 / 121 / 40 / 0 / 2 Chile / 0 / 0 / 34 / 0 / 0 Paraguay / 667 / 16 / 0 / 0 / 2 Uruguay / 0 / 0 / 1 / 0 / 0 Totals, Americas / 567 605 / 213 686 / 5985 / 20 / 3374 [Maps showing the location of the affected islands and countries in the Americas mentioned above and below can be accessed at:  ; North America at ; Central America ; Caribbean and South America at . - Mod.TY] Cases in various countries not mentioned above or more recent case numbers. Asia --- Singapore. 21 Jun 2017. (conf.) 2 new cases located at Kensington Park Drive. [Maps of Singapore can be accessed at and . - Mod.TY] Imported cases with little or no possibility of ongoing mosquito transmission --- South Korea. 17 Jun 2017. (conf.) 21 cases, the latest on 10 Jun 2017 ex Thailand. [A map of South Korea can be accessed at  . - Mod.JH] USA:  - Case numbers mainland. Zika virus disease in the United States, 1 Jan 2017 - 21 Jun 2017 State/ Symptomatic cases / Viremic blood donors Alabama 3 / 0 Alaska 1 / 0 Arizona 1 / 0 Arkansas 0 / 0 California 15 / 1 Colorado 3 / 0 Connecticut 0 / 0 Delaware 0 / 0 District of Columbia 0 / 0 Florida 15 / 3 Georgia 1 / 0 Hawaii 1 / 0 Idaho 0 / 0 Illinois 4/ 0 Indiana 1 / 0 Iowa 1 / 0 Kansas 2 / 0 Kentucky 1 / 0 Louisiana 1 / 1 Maine 1 / 0 Maryland 4 / 0 Massachusetts 6 / 0 Michigan 6 / 0 Minnesota 0 / 0 Mississippi 2 / 0 Missouri 1 / 0 Montana 0 / 0 Nebraska 1 / 0 Nevada 1 / 0 New Hampshire 0/ 0 New Jersey 2 / 0 New Mexico 0 / 0 New York 274 / 1 North Carolina 3 / 0 North Dakota 0 / 0 Ohio 3 / 0 Oklahoma 0 / 0 Oregon 1 / 0 Pennsylvania 4/ 1 Rhode Island 3 / 0 South Carolina 2 / 0 South Dakota 0 / 0 Tennessee 0 / 0 Texas 11 / 1 Utah 0 / 0 Vermont 3 / 0 Virginia 3 / 0 Washington 2 / 0 West Virginia 0 / 1 Wisconsin 2 / 0 Wyoming 2 / 0 Totals 140 / 9  - Territories and Commonwealth with local transmission: Symptomatic / Blood donors American Samoa 3 / 0 Puerto Rico 470 / 3 US Virgin Islands 37/ 0 Total 510 / 3 [A map of the USA showing the states and territories mentioned above can be accessed at  ] -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail ****** [2] _Aedes vexans_ as vectors Date: Tue 6 Jun 2017 Source: Amer J Trop Med Hyg 96 (6): 1338 - 1340 DOI: https://doi.org/10.4269/ajtmh.16-0963 [edited] Alex Gendernalik1, James Weger-Lucarelli1, Selene M. Garcia Luna1, Joseph R. Fauver, et al. American _Aedes vexans_ Mosquitoes are Competent Vectors of Zika Virus. Abstract Starting in 2013-2014, the Americas have experienced a massive outbreak of Zika virus (ZIKV) which has now reached at least 49 countries. Although most cases have occurred in South America and the Caribbean, imported and autochthonous cases have occurred in the United States. _Aedes aegypti_ and _Aedes albopictus_ mosquitoes are known vectors of ZIKV. Little is known about the potential for temperate _Aedes_ mosquitoes to transmit ZIKV. _Aedes vexans_ has a worldwide distribution, is highly abundant in particular localities, aggressively bites humans, and is a competent vector of several arboviruses. However, it is not clear whether _Ae. vexans_ mosquitoes are competent to transmit ZIKV. To determine the vector competence of _Ae. vexans_ for ZIKV, wild-caught mosquitoes were exposed to an infectious bloodmeal containing a ZIKV strain isolated during the current outbreak. Approximately 80 percent of 148 mosquitoes tested became infected by ZIKV, and approximately 5 percent transmitted infectious virus after 14 days of extrinsic incubation. These results establish that _Ae. vexans_ are competent ZIKV vectors. Their relative importance as vectors (i.e., their vectorial capacity) depends on feeding behavior, longevity, and other factors that are likely to vary in ecologically distinct environments. -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail [The authors point out critical factors that would establish their importance, or lack of it, as Zika virus vectors. They are very abundant in some locations. If individual mosquitoes seldom feed repeatedly on humans, they are unlikely to be very important in initiating and maintaining Zika virus outbreaks. These mosquitoes captured in locations where Zika virus transmission is occurring should be tested for the virus. The experiments described above justify that effort. - Mod.TY] ****** [3] _Aedes aegypti_, _Aedes albopictus_ and _Culex quinquefasciatus_ competence as virus vectors Date: July 2017 [ahead of print] Source: Emerg Infect Dis. 2017;23(7):1085-1091. https://dx.doi.org/10.3201/eid2307.161528 [edited] Liu Z, Zhou T, Lai Z, Zhang Z, Jia Z, Zhou G, et al. Competence of _Aedes aegypti_, _Ae. albopictus_, and _Culex quinquefasciatus_ Mosquitoes as Zika Virus Vectors, China. Abstract In China, the prevention and control of Zika virus disease has been a public health threat since the 1st imported case was reported in February 2016. To determine the vector competence of potential vector mosquito species, we experimentally infected _Aedes aegypti_, _Ae. albopictus_, and _Culex quinquefasciatus_ mosquitoes and determined infection rates, dissemination rates, and transmission rates. We found the highest vector competence for the imported Zika virus in _Ae. aegypti_ mosquitoes, some susceptibility of _Ae. albopictus_ mosquitoes, but no transmission ability for _Cx. quinquefasciatus_ mosquitoes. Considering that, in China, _Ae. albopictus_ mosquitoes are widely distributed but _Ae. aegypti_ mosquito distribution is limited, _Ae. albopictus_ mosquitoes are a potential primary vector for Zika virus and should be targeted in vector control strategies. -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail [These results are similar to those of other studies except for one previous study and the one below that found _Cx. quinquefasciatus_ to be a competent vector in the laboratory. - Mod.TY] ****** [4] _Aedes aegypti_ and _Ae. albopictus_ distribution change in the USA Date: Mon 19 Jun 2017 Source: J Med Entomol. DOI:https://doi.org/10.1093/jme/tjx088 [edited] Micah B. Hahn, Lars Eisen, Janet McAllister, Harry M. Savage, John-Paul Mutebi, Rebecca J. Eisen. Updated Reported Distribution of _Aedes (Stegomyia) aegypti_ and _Aedes (Stegomyia) albopictus_ (Diptera: Culicidae) in the United States, 1995-2016. Abstract _Aedes (Stegomyia) aegypti_ (L.) and _Aedes (Stegomyia) albopictus_ (Skuse) are potential vectors of Zika, dengue, and chikungunya viruses in the United States. A Zika virus outbreak in Florida in the summer of 2016, driven by _Ae. aegypti_ and resulting in\u2009[greater than]\u2009200 locally acquired cases of human illness, underscored the need for up-to-date information on the geographic distribution of _Ae. aegypti_ and _Ae. albopictus_ in the United States. In early 2016, we conducted a survey and literature review to compile county records for presence of _Ae. aegypti_ and _Ae. albopictus_ in the United States from 1995 to 2016. Surveillance for these vectors was intensified across the United States during the summer and fall of 2016. At the end of 2016, we therefore conducted a follow-up survey of mosquito control agencies, university researchers, and state and local health departments to document new collection records for _Ae. aegypti_ and _Ae. albopictus_. The repeated survey at the end of the year [2016] added _Ae. aegypti_ collection records from 38 new counties and _Ae. albopictus_ collection records from 127 new counties, representing a 21 and 10 percent increase, respectively, in the number of counties with reported presence of these mosquitoes compared with the previous report. Moreover, through our updated survey, 40 and 183 counties, respectively, added additional years of collection records for _Ae. aegypti_ and _Ae. albopictus_ from 1995 to 2016. Our findings underscore the continued need for systematic surveillance of _Ae. aegypti_ and _Ae. albopictus_. -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts [The authors make an important point about the need for continued systematic surveillance of these 2 species. As climate continues to change, it seems certain that the distribution of these species will change as well along with the viruses that they transmit. - Mod.TY] ****** [5] Early virus circulation in Brazil Date: August 2017 [ahead of print] Source: Emerg Infect Dis. https://doi.org/10.3201/eid2308.162007 DOI: 10.3201/eid2308.162007 [edited] Ayllon T, de Mendon\u00e7a Campos R, Brasil P, Morone FC, Camara DCP, Meira GLS, et al. Early Evidence for Zika virus circulation among _Aedes aegypti_ mosquitoes, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil Abstract During 2014-2016, we conducted mosquito-based Zika virus surveillance in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil. Results suggest that Zika virus was probably introduced into the area during May-November 2013 via multiple in-country sources. Furthermore, our results strengthen the hypothesis that Zika virus in the Americas originated in Brazil during October 2012-May 2013. -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail ****** [6] Virus in various mosquito species Date: Mon 19 Jun 2017 Source: Bio Rx Iv doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/151951 [edited] Darwin Elizondo-Quiroga, Aaron Medina-Sanchez, Jorge M Sanchez-Gonzalez, et al. Zika Virus in Salivary Glands of 5 Different Species of Wild-Caught Mosquitoes from Mexico. Abstract Zika virus (ZIKV) is a mosquito-borne virus and _Aedes aegypti_ has been mentioned as the main vector of the disease. Other mosquito species in the _Aedes_ and _Culex_ genera have been suggested to have the potential for being competent vectors, based on experimental exposition of mosquitoes to an infectious blood meal containing ZIKV. Here, we report the isolation in cell culture of ZIKV from different body parts of wild-caught female mosquitoes (_Ae. aegypti_, _Ae. vexans_, _Culex quinquefasciatus_, _Cx. coronator_, and _Cx. tarsalis_) and whole male mosquitoes (_Ae. aegypti_ and _Cx. quinquefasciatus_) in Mexico. Importantly, the virus was isolated from the salivary glands of all of these mosquitoes, strongly suggesting that these species are potential vectors for ZIKV. -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail [The finding of Zika virus in the wild caught female _Ae. aegypti_ and _Ae. vexans_ corresponds to results from other studies. Finding of Zika virus in the body parts, including salivary glands of 3 wild-caught _Culex_ species again raises the question about their vector capacity. Confirmation will require experiments where they ingest a blood meal with virus, virus replication in them is documented, and transmission accomplished by bite. As noted in a report above, _Cx. quinquefasciatus_ has been found refractory to Zika virus infection. - Mod.TY] ****** [7] Virus strain and vector competence Date: July 2017 [ahead of print] Source: Emerg Infect Dis. 2017;23(7):1110-1117. https://dx.doi.org/10.3201/eid2307.161633 [edited] Ciota AT, Bialosuknia SM, Zink SD, Brecher M, Ehrbar DJ, Morrissette MN, et al. Effects of Zika Virus Strain and _Aedes_ Mosquito Species on Vector Competence. Emerg Infect Dis. 2017;23(7):1110-1117. Abstract In the Western Hemisphere, Zika virus is thought to be transmitted primarily by _Aedes aegypti_ mosquitoes. To determine the extent to which _Ae. albopictus_ mosquitoes from the United States are capable of transmitting Zika virus and the influence of virus dose, virus strain, and mosquito species on vector competence, we evaluated multiple doses of representative Zika virus strains in _Ae. aegypti_ and _Ae. albopictus_ mosquitoes. Virus preparation (fresh vs. frozen) significantly affected virus infectivity in mosquitoes. We calculated 50 percent infectious doses to be 6.1-7.5 log ^10 PFU/mL; minimum infective dose was 4.2 log ^10 PFU/mL. _Ae. albopictus_ mosquitoes were more susceptible to infection than _Ae. aegypti_ mosquitoes, but transmission efficiency was higher for _Ae. aegypti_ mosquitoes, indicating a transmission barrier in _Ae. albopictus_ mosquitoes. Results suggest that, although Zika virus transmission is relatively inefficient overall and dependent on virus strain and mosquito species, _Ae. albopictus_ mosquitoes could become major vectors in the Americas. -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail [_Ae. aegypti_ has a significant advantage as a Zika virus vector - it is a fairly strict human biter and lives in and around human habitations and buildings. _Ae. albopictus_ feeds on other animals in addition to humans, and can breed at sites more removed from human habitations and buildings, reducing but not eliminating the probability of human-mosquito-human transmission of the virus. - Mod.TY] ****** [8] Virus in fetal tissue Date: Fri 23 Jun 2017 Source: MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 2017;66:636-643. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.15585/mmwr.mm6624a3 [edited] Reagan-Steiner S, Simeone R, Simon E, et al. Evaluation of Placental and Fetal Tissue Specimens for Zika Virus Infection -- 50 States and District of Columbia, January-December, 2016. Summary What is already known about this topic? Zika virus infection during pregnancy can cause microcephaly and other brain abnormalities. Diagnosis of Zika virus infection is challenging because of serologic cross-reactivity with other related flaviviruses and limited duration of viremia. Zika virus RNA can be detected in placental and fetal tissues, which can provide an opportunity to diagnose maternal Zika virus infection and can be considered when maternal serologic testing is not definitive or is negative outside the optimal testing window. What is added by this report? In the 50 U.S. states and District of Columbia, placental testing provided a confirmed diagnosis of recent maternal Zika virus infection for 10 percent of live births with possible maternal exposure to Zika virus that lacked definitive evidence of a maternal or congenital Zika virus infection. This included pregnancies with clinical laboratory evidence of recent unspecified maternal flavivirus infection, and those with negative maternal Zika virus IgM, where possible maternal exposure occurred [greater than] 12 weeks before serum collection. What are the implications for public health practice? Testing of placental tissues from live births provided definitive evidence of maternal Zika virus infection. Although the proportion of live births for which placental tissue was RT-PCR-positive for Zika virus was relatively low, testing of placental tissues from live births can continue to be considered when results of maternal Zika virus testing are not definitive or testing is not performed within the optimal time. Ensuring appropriate Zika virus testing and clinical follow-up of infants, according to published CDC guidance is critical in order to identify congenital Zika virus infection. -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail [Knowing that there was maternal Zika virus infection during pregnancy is important. Not all infected fetuses will develop microcephaly or eye lesions, but may have reduced brain development after birth. The development of these infants needs to be tracked over time. Another study published ahead of print studied 7 virus-infected neonates of which 6 did not show intrauterine growth restriction, but all 7 had remarkably decreased brain weight, emphasizing the neurotropism of Zika virus. These findings are similar to those earlier reported for congenital Zika virus infection ( ). - Mod.TY] [", "AVIAN INFLUENZA, HUMAN (59): CHINA, H7N9 **************************************** A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases In this update: [1] Sichuan - 3 updates [2] Tianjin [3] Guizhou ****** [1] Sichuan - 3 updates Date: Tue 20 Jun 2017 12:5 PM Source: FIC (Flu Information Centre/Flu in China) [edited] According to the CDC of Panzhihua city, Panzhihua central hospital reported one suspected human H7N9 AIV case on [Fri 16 Jun 2017], after reconfirmation of provincial CDC lab on [Sun 18 Jun 2017], the patient was confirmed to be the 1st human H7N9 case in Panzhihua city. The 48-year-old male, surname Y, resident of Tianba village of Renhe town of Renhe district of Panzhihua city in Sichuan province, worked in the 1st agriculture market in Renhe district for live poultry trading and slaughtering business. He remained in Panzhihua central hospital for treatment and quarantine, 7 close contacts were under medical monitoring and had showed no ILI symptoms so far. -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail --- Date: Tue 20 Jun 2017 16:2 PM Source: FIC (Flu Information Centre/Flu in China) [edited] According to the authority of Renhe district of Panzhihua city, Pangang General hospital reported one human H7N9 case on [Mon 19 Jun 2017], after reconfirmation of provincial CDC lab; the patient was confirmed to be the 2nd human H7N9 case in Panzhihua city. The 79-year-old male, lived in the 1st agriculture market in Renhe district. He remained in Pangang General hospital for treatment and quarantine, 4 close contacts were under medical monitoring and had showed no ILI symptoms so far. -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail --- Date: Wed 21 Jun 2017 18:55 PM Source: FIC (Flu Information Centre/Flu in China) [edited] According to the authority, Sichuan province reported 2 human H7N9 AIV cases during 24th May to 2nd June [2017]. 1) 61-year-old female in Weiyuan county of Neijiang city 2) 67-year-old male in Renshou county of Meishan city Together with the 2 cases reported in Panzhihua city this week [week of 18-24 Jun 2017], Sichuan province had reported 38 human H7N9 AIV cases so far. -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail ****** [2] Tianjin Date: Wed 21 Jun 2017 20:29 PM Source: FIC (Flu Information Centre/Flu in China) [edited] Tianjin reported one human H7N9 AIV case on [Tue 20 Jun 2017]. The 62-year-old male, lived in Jinghai district. The patient was in designated hospital for treatment, all close contacts of the patient were under medical monitoring, and no one showed ILI symptoms so far. -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail ****** [3]Guizhou Date: Thu 22 Jun 2017 9:23 AM Source: FIC (Flu Information Centre/Flu in China) [edited] According to the HFPC of Guizhou province, one unknown pneumonia case reported by the affiliated Baiyun hospital of Guizhou medical School confirmed to be a human H7N9 AIV case after tested positive for H7N9 on [Mon 19 Jun 2017] by provincial and Guizhou city CDC. The 33-year-old male patient, lived in Yanshanhong town of Baiyun district of Guizhou city, was working in a live poultry booth for transporting the live chicken. He had onset of symptoms on [Fri 16 Jun 2017], was transferred into the ICU ward of affiliated hospital of Guizhou Medical School for treatment on [Mon 19 Jun 2017]. Also, as the Hong Kong CHP\u00b4s Avian influenza weekly report, one human H7N9 AIV case (68-year-old male) reported in Bijie city of Guizhou province last week [week of 11-17 Jun 2017]. -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail [Human cases of avian influenza A/H7N9 continue to be reported from various parts of China with majority of cases having direct exposure to live poultry. Continued emphasis on surveillance and control measures in both the human and animal health sectors is important. - Mod.UBA A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  ,  ,  .] [", "AVIAN INFLUENZA (117): SOUTH KOREA, POULTRY, HPAI, SPREAD, SEROTYPING PENDING ***************************************************************************** A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Fri 23 Jun 2017 17:43:41 Source: KBS World Radio [edited] The government of Daegu City says a case of avian influenza (AI) detected [Wed 21 Jun 2017] has been confirmed as a highly pathogenic strain. The infected chicken was being kept in a makeshift pen in Dong District before being tested by the Animal and Plant Quarantine Agency. Daegu says it is strengthening quarantine measures to prevent the spread of bird flu, including a transport ban on poultry, more checkpoints, and strengthened disinfection services. The city has culled 725 birds bred in 7 farms within the 3-kilometer radius from where the infected chicken was found. -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail [South Korea has been experiencing a new epizootic of HPAI H5N8 which has reportedly started on 6 Feb 2017. Its last available OIE follow up report, No 2, dates back to 13 Jun 2017. As of the said date, 61 outbreaks were reported, most of them along the entire western parts of S. Korea, with a cluster situated in the south-east. The current outbreak is close to the south-eastern cluster. The event's epidemiological statistics have been last summarized as of 13 Jun 2017: Reported outbreaks: 61 Species/ Susceptible/ Cases/ Deaths/ Killed and disposed of/ Slaughtered Birds/ 2 084 952/ 1326/ 1385/ 2 083 567/ 0 Links to the immediate notification and the 2 follow-up reports, and a map presenting the 61 outbreaks, are available at  . The new HPAI outbreak in Daegu (map at ) is likely to be caused by the same strain/serotype HPAI H5N8, yet to be confirmed. - Mod.AS] [", "CLOSTRIDIUM PERFRINGENS FOODBORNE ILLNESS - USA (02): (COLORADO) **************************************************************** A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Fri 23 Jun 2017 Source: Food Safety News [edited] Health officials say they're sure food from a specific vendor at the Rifle Rodeo in Garfield County, CO, caused an outbreak that sickened 40 percent of attendees, but they won't name the rodeo organizer or the food vendor, neither of whom obtained required permits and neither of whom will be fined. About 80 of the 200 rodeo attendees reported getting sick with gastrointestinal illnesses after attending the 5 Jun 2017 event, according to a [Wed 21 Jun 2017], update from the Garfield County Public Health Department. Even though the rodeo was at the county fairgrounds, public health was apparently not notified by staff there about the upcoming event with food vendors. Of the victims, about one-4th were children younger than 18, a county spokeswoman said [Thu 22 Jun 2017] afternoon. She said the county had not officially been notified of any victims being hospitalized. \"Lab samples sent to the Colorado Department of Public Health and Environment came back positive for _Clostridium perfringens_, a leading cause of foodborne illness,\" according to the county's online update. \"Case interviews of rodeo attendees linked the source of the illness to food served by an unlicensed vendor at the event.\" The executive director of Garfield County Public Health placed the blame for the outbreak on the event organizer, saying the Rifle Rodeo organizer did not obtain required permits. \"... therefore Garfield County Public Health was not aware of or able to inspect food at the event prior to the 5 Jun 2017 outbreak,\" said executive director Yvonne Long in the online statement. \"One thing that we want the public to know is that for public events it is the coordinator's responsibility to find out and comply with the rules, regulations, permits, sales tax requirements and licenses required to host an event.\" The specific food vendor implicated in the outbreak has a \"primary location\" that has been inspected, is licensed and is regulated, according to the county health department, but county officials refused [Thu 22 Jun 2017], to name the vendor. \"The county did not name the food vendor because the vendor has been in business for years without violations and public health is using this as an opportunity to work with the vendor to promote healthy practices and prevent further issues,\" the county's spokeswoman said in an email. Improper holding temperatures for food are a primary cause of _Clostridium perfringens_ fodborne illness, according to the CDC and the Garfield County Public Health Department. Similarly, the county will not name the individual who organized the Rifle Rodeo. \"The organization is named 'Rifle Rodeo.' We did not provide the personal name of the organizer because this is a 1st occurrence, and the organizer is working closely with public health to comply with the county,\" the county's spokeswoman said. The health department executive director is quoted by several local media outlets as saying no one will be fined in relation to the outbreak, even though the proper permits were not secured. Standard procedure for the department if a vendor \"fails to pull required permits, has an outbreak, or has areas of improvement noted on a health inspection\" is to deliver written notification and work with the entity on safety regulations, according to the [Wed 21 Jun 2017] update. The county does not have plans to take any specific action or change procedures in an attempt to prevent such situations in the future. Regarding communication between county departments, such as the county fairgrounds staff and public health inspectors, \"the county is ensuring the fairgrounds staff does so,\" according to the county's spokeswoman. \"As noted in the release, event organizers are required to obtain permits and the county will continue to ensure good food safety practices for such temporary events,\" the spokeswoman said. The Denver Post reported some rodeo attendees who got sick said they ate pulled pork at the event. The CDC reports that the majority of _Clostridium perfringens_ outbreaks are associated with undercooked meats and large quantities of food prepared for groups and left unrefrigerated or unheated for too long. If food is kept between 70 degrees and 140 degrees, it is likely to grow _Clostridium perfringens_ bacteria. Food poisoning from _Clostridium perfringens_ is fairly common, but is typically not too severe, and is often mistaken for the 24-hour flu. However, the Type C strain of _Clostridium perfringens_ can cause a more serious condition called Pig-bel Syndrome. This syndrome can cause death of intestinal cells and can often be fatal. -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail [Unlike staphylococcal foodborne illness where the preformed toxin is ingested, in _C. perfringens_ disease, the enterotoxin is formed _in situ_ in the gastrointestinal tract. The following discussion is obtained from the FDA Bad Bug Book \"1. Name of the organism _Clostridium perfringens_ is an anaerobic, Gram-positive, spore-forming rod. It is widely distributed in the environment and frequently occurs in the intestines of humans and many domestic and feral animals. Spores of the organism persist in soil, sediments, and areas subject to human or animal fecal pollution. 2. Nature of acute disease Perfringens food poisoning is the term used to describe the common foodborne illness caused by _C. perfringens_. A more serious but rare illness is also caused by ingesting food contaminated with type C strains. The latter illness is known as enteritis necroticans or pig-bel disease. 3. Nature of disease The common form of perfringens poisoning is characterized by intense abdominal cramps and diarrhea, which begin 8-22 hours after consumption of foods containing large numbers of those _C. perfringens_ bacteria capable of producing the food poisoning toxin. The illness is usually over within 24 hours, but less severe symptoms may persist in some individuals for 1-2 weeks. A few deaths have been reported as a result of dehydration and other complications. Necrotic enteritis (pig-bel) caused by _C. perfringens_ is often fatal. This disease also begins as a result of ingesting large numbers of the causative bacteria in contaminated foods. Deaths from necrotic enteritis (pig-bel syndrome) are caused by infection and necrosis of the intestines and from resulting septicemia. This disease is very rare in the USA. Infective dose: The symptoms are caused by ingestion of large numbers (greater than 100 0000 000) vegetative cells. Toxin production in the digestive tract (or in test tubes) is associated with sporulation. This disease is a food infection; only one episode has ever implied the possibility of intoxication (that is, disease from preformed toxin). 4. Diagnosis of human illness Perfringens poisoning is diagnosed by its symptoms and the typical delayed onset of illness. Diagnosis is confirmed by detecting the toxin in the feces of patients. Bacteriological confirmation can also be done by finding exceptionally large numbers of the causative bacteria in implicated foods or in the feces of patients. 5. Associated foods In most instances, the actual cause of poisoning by _C. perfringens_ is temperature abuse of prepared foods. Small numbers of the organisms are often present after cooking and multiply to food poisoning levels during cool down and storage of prepared foods. Meats, meat products, and gravy are the foods most frequently implicated. 6. Relative frequency of disease Perfringens poisoning is one of the most commonly reported foodborne illnesses in the USA. There were 1162 cases in 1981, in 28 separate outbreaks. At least 10-20 outbreaks have been reported annually in the USA for the past 2 decades. Typically, dozens or even hundreds of persons are affected. It is probable that many outbreaks go unreported because the implicated foods or patient feces are not tested routinely for _C. perfringens_ or its toxin. CDC estimates that about 10 000 actual cases occur annually in the USA. 7. Course of disease and complications The disease generally lasts 24 hours. In the elderly or infirm, symptoms may last 1-2 weeks. Complications and/or death only very rarely occur. 8. Target populations Institutional feeding (such as school cafeterias, hospitals, nursing homes, prisons, etc.) where large quantities of food are prepared several hours before serving is the most common circumstance in which perfringens poisoning occurs. The young and elderly are the most frequent victims of perfringens poisoning. Except in the case of pig-bel syndrome, complications are few in persons under 30 years of age. Elderly persons are more likely to experience prolonged or severe symptoms. 9. Food analysis Standard bacteriological culturing procedures are used to detect the organism in implicated foods and in feces of patients. Serological assays are used for detecting enterotoxin in the feces of patients and for testing the ability of strains to produce toxin. The procedures take 1-3 days.\" The FDA discussion notes that deaths from necrotic enteritis (pig-bel syndrome) are caused by infection and necrosis of the intestines and from resulting septicemia. This disease is very rare in the USA but seems to have occurred in this instance. The following is a paper regarding a case of pig-bel: Gui L, Subramony C, Fratkin J, Hughson MD: Fatal enteritis necroticans (pigbel) in a diabetic adult. Mod Pathol. 2002; 15(1): 66-70; \"Abstract Enteritis necroticans is a segmental necrotizing infection of the jejunum and ileum caused by _Clostridium perfringens_, type C. The disease occurs sporadically in parts of Asia, Africa, and the South Pacific, where it primarily affects children with severe protein malnutrition. The disease is extremely rare in developed countries, where it has been seen primarily in diabetics. Two cases have previously been reported in the United States, one in a child with poorly controlled type 1 diabetes. A 66-year-old woman with a 12-year history of type 2 diabetes mellitus developed severe abdominal pain and bloody diarrhea after eating a meal of turkey sausage. She died unattended at home. An autopsy showed peritonitis and segmental necrosis of the jejunum and ileum. Microscopic examination showed Gram-positive club-shaped bacilli consistent with Clostridia coating a necrotic mucosa. Products of cpa and cpb genes of _C. perfringens_, type C were identified in the necrotic jejunum by polymerase chain reaction amplification\". - Mod.LL A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  .] [", "TOXIC SPIDER BITE - VENEZUELA: (ZULIA) BLACK WIDOW SPIDER ********************************************************* A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Wed 7 Jun 2017 4:38 pm Source: Ultimas noticias [in Spanish, trans. KS, edited] The introduction of invasive black widow spiders into Venezuela continues to claim lives. This species, which is not native to South America, has spread in the Andean and western regions of the country over the past few years. In Zulia, one of the states with the highest incidence of bites of _Latrodectus mactans_, 7 cases have been recorded, including 2 deaths, between March and May [2017 presumably. - Mod.TG]. Although it is not known exactly how this species arrived in the country, it is presumed that it was introduced from Panama, through Colombia. According to official reports, black widow sightings and bites have been reported in Falcon, Lara, Yaracuy, Trujillo and Tachira. First Lieutenant Luis Contreras, of the Marine Firemen of the National Institute of Aquatic Spaces (Inea), explained that the bite of this arachnid is lethal to humans, and its toxin can even kill a horse. \"Between March and May of this year [2017], 7 cases of poisoning from black widow spider bites have been reported, especially in the Sur del Lago de Maracaibo and Sierra de Perija areas,\" he said. One of the victims is MV, 21, who died on 2 March 2017 at the general hospital of Sur del Maracaibo, where he was transferred after being bitten by a black widow while he cut oil palm in the area of Jesus Maria Semprum. The other is SQ, 17, who was bitten while he was collecting fertilizer in the Pan American sector, also in the Sur del Lago area, but in the state of Merida. Contreras, who is a specialist in snakes and poisonous animals, said that the venom antiserum should be applied within 6 hours of the bite. \"In Venezuela, unfortunately, this serum is not produced, because this species is not native to the country. The doses that arrive are imported, some from Costa Rica and others from Mexico. All come via donations, because they are very expensive,\" he said. The official urged citizens to be alert to the presence of these spiders. [Byline: Christopher Gutierrez] -- Communicated by Kathryn Soderholm [Black widow spiders (_Latrodectus mactans_) are found throughout the USA and much of Mexico. One characteristic identifying mark is a red hourglass on the underside of the abdomen of the spider. Also the spider tends to be a very shiny black, almost like wet black paint and they appear very slick. The bite of one of these spiders produces severe pain, generally immediately or within a very few minutes of the bite. This pain can lead to muscle cramping, including of the abdomen and back. A hallmark of this bite is the pain will not subside, even when given anti-inflammatory drugs, including morphine. When pain is intractable in the face of morphine, then it should be immediately noted as a likely black widow bite. There is antivenom (Antivenin _Latrodectus mactans_) that has been proven safe and effective. It is sometimes withheld for fear of reaction to the antivenom. Given the extreme pain the victim experiences, and the few reactions to the antivenom, it would seem prudent to provide the antivenin. Now that Venezuela is aware the spider is in their country, and there have been deaths, it seems to be prudent to secure a source of the antivenom and provide hospitals across the country with it. A close friend of mine was bitten by a black widow. He kept working and by the time he arrived at my house he was in excruciating pain. He was having trouble breathing and had severe cramps. He was hospitalized where a physician could not seem to read that his EKG was perfectly normal. So he gave morphine which had no effect. His wife demanded a neurological consult which quickly determined he had been bitten by a black widow. Because of the emergency room's physician reluctance to treat when morphine did not result in any pain relief, my friend spent several days recovering in the hospital. A timely administration of the antivenom in the emergency room would have left the patient more comfortable and being discharged by morning. Hopefully, Venezuela will have a source of antivenom and get hospitals stocked with this life saving treatment. - Mod.TG] [The ongoing healthcare crisis in Venezuela will likely only worsen the threat posed by this recent invader ( ). - Mod.JH A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  .] [", "HEPATITIS E - NEPAL: (DOLKHA, KATHMANDU) **************************************** A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases [1] Date: Tue 20 Jun 2017 From: Dr Sher Bahadur Pun [edited] On [Sun 18 Jun 2017], a 28-year-old pregnant woman with hepatitis E virus (HEV), visited Sukraraj Tropical and Infectious Disease Hospital, for a follow up consultation. Her liver enzymes were remarkably elevated (ALT-1972 IU/L, AST-988 IU/L). She had visited Makaibari-11, Dolkha district [Province Three] a month ago, where she joined a religious ceremony attended by 80 to 90 local people. They used tap water in the ceremony. She was diagnosed with HEV after her return from Dolkha district. It was not immediately known whether other people who joined the same ceremony became sick due to HEV. HEV remains one of the public health problems in Nepal, though data reporting is suboptimal and surveillance system is inadequate. -- Communicated by: Dr Sher Bahadur Pun, MD,PhD Clinical Research Unit, Sukraraj Tropical and Infectious Disease Hospital, Kathmandu, Nepal. ****** [2] Date: Fri 23 Jun 2017 From: Dr Anup Bastola [edited] A 17-year-old male, student from Bhadrabas-16, Sundarijal, Kathmandu (province 3) was admited on [Wed 21 Jun 2017] with history of yellow discoloration of sclera, epigastric pain and vomiting. He had fever before appearance of jaundice. There was no history of travel. Clinically he had jaundice with epigastric pain. He had increased level of bilirubin, marked increases in hepatic enzymes with prolonged prothrombin time. Serology for hepatitis A, C and B virus was negative. IgM rapid diagnostic test was positive for hepatitis E. Hepatitis E is seen in Nepal in sporadic form. Though fatal in pregnant women, it may have increased morbidity among other population. Provision of safe drinking water, sanitation, and hand hygiene can prevent this disease. -- Communicated by: Dr Anup Bastola, MD, MCTM Consultant Tropical Medicine Physician Sukraraj Tropical and Infectious Disease Hospital, Teku, Kathmandu [ProMEd thanks Dr Pun and Dr Bastola for the submission. Hepatitis E genotypes 1 and 2 are the major waterborne forms of HEV and they tend to occur in the developing world especially Africa and Asia. These types can cause significant outbreaks (as what is occurring currently in Niger) with acute hepatitis deaths especially in 2nd and 3rd trimester pregnant women. Genotypes 3 and 4 are zoonotic with swine being a major reservoir and tend to be seen in the developed world. Type 3 in particular can cause chronic infection, especially in the immunocompromised host. Genotypes 5, 6 and 7 are rarely mentioned in clinical reports on human HEV [hepatitis E virus] infection; 5 and 6 have been isolated from wild boar only and 7 from camels and a single human. Regarding the genotypes, the following is extracted from Lhomme S, Marion O, Abravanel F, Chapuy-Regaud S, Kamar N and Izopet J: Hepatitis E pathogenesis. Viruses. 2016 Aug; 8(8): 212: \"The increasing number of HEV strains identified in various hosts has led to a taxonomic scheme that divides the family _Hepeviridae_ into 2 genera: _Piscihepevirus_ (cutthroat trout virus) and _Orthohepevirus_ (mammalian and avian strains) [10,11]. This last genus has been divided into 4 species, _Orthohepevirus A_, _Orthohepevirus B_ (infecting birds), _Orthohepevirus C_ (infecting rodents, soricomorphs, and carnivores), and _Orthohepevirus D_ (infecting bats). The largest species, _Orthohepevirus A_, includes 7 genotypes that infect humans (HEV1, 2, 3, 4, and 7), pigs (HEV3 and 4), rabbits (HEV3), wild boar (HEV3, 4, 5, and 6), mongooses (HEV3), deer (HEV3), yaks (HEV4) and camels (HEV7). Among the 4 major genotypes, HEV1 and HEV2 are restricted to humans and are found in developing countries. HEV3 is widely distributed around the world and HEV4 is found mainly in Asia. The HEV3 and HEV4 genotypes are transmitted zoonotically from pigs, wild boars, deer, and mongooses [12]. Rabbit strains that are closed to HEV3 have recently been described in humans [13]. A liver transplant recipient who had consumed camel meat and milk was found to harbor camel HEV [14]. The transmission of HEV from ferrets, rats, bats, birds, or trout to humans has not yet been demonstrated [12]. 10. Smith DB, Simmonds P., International Committee on Taxonomy of Viruses Hepeviridae Study Group: Consensus proposals for classification of the family Hepeviridae. J Gen Virol. 2014;95(Pt 10): 2223-32. 11. Smith DB, Simmonds P, Izopet J, et al: Proposed reference sequences for Hepatitis E virus subtypes. J Gen Virol 2016;97: 537-42. 12. Meng XJ: Zoonotic and foodborne transmission of Hepatitis E virus. Semin. Liver Dis. 2013;33: 41-9. 13. Izopet J, Dubois M, Bertagnoli S, et al: Hepatitis E virus strains in rabbits and evidence of a closely related strain in humans, France. Emerg Infect Dis 2012;18: 1274-81. 14. Lee GH, Tan BH, Chi-Yuan Teo E, et al: Chronic infection with camelid Hepatitis E virus in a liver transplant recipient who regularly consumes camel meat and milk. Gastroenterology. 2016;150: 355-357\". - Mod.LL A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  ,  .] [", "CHOLERA, DIARRHEA AND DYSENTERY UPDATE (60): ASIA (YEMEN) ********************************************************* A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Sat 24 Jun 2017 3:42 PM ET Source: NPR [edited] Seized by violence and teetering on the edge of famine, Yemen is grappling with another danger that threatens to outpace them both: cholera. \"We are now facing the worst cholera outbreak in the world,\" international health authorities said in a statement [Sat 24 Jun 2017]. Anthony Lake, executive director of UNICEF, and Margaret Chan, director-general of the WHO, say that \"more than 1300 people have died -- one quarter of them children -- and the death toll is expected to rise.\" That's because they suspect Yemen now has upwards of 200 000 cases to grapple with, and that number is only growing quickly -- by a rate of roughly 5000 cases a day. \"And geographically it is expanding,\" Mohamed El Montassir Hussein, Yemen director for the International Rescue Committee, told NPR's Jason Beaubien earlier this month [June 2017]. \"It's not a small area. It's almost the whole country.\" Hussein added: \"There is nowhere in the country you can say this place is better than another,\" says Hussein. \"Every family is suffering from something whether it's cholera or lack of food, having child soldiers in the family or having someone go join the rebels or the military. There's been a whole collapse of the social life.\" After more than 2 years of civil war, Yemen's health care system is at risk of \"complete collapse,\" a UNICEF spokesman told Jason. The country has been roiled by violence since Houthi rebels seized power and ousted the president, who fled to sanctuary in neighboring Saudi Arabia. Since then, a Saudi-led coalition supported by the USA has waged a protracted campaign against the rebels -- and some worry that support makes the USA complicit in Yemen's deepening humanitarian crisis. \"There's an American imprint on every civilian death inside Yemen that's caused by the Saudi bombing campaign,\" Democratic Sen. Chris Murphy of Connecticut told NPR's Michele Kelemen in May 2017 after the USA signed a new arms deal with Saudi Arabia. \"The Saudis simply could not operate this bombing campaign without us,\" he continued. \"Their planes can't fly without USA refueling capacity. They are dropping munitions that we've sold them. We are standing side by side with them often when they are reviewing intelligence about targets.\" Saudi Arabia's new crown prince, Mohammed bin Salman -- who, as NPR's Deborah Amos reports, is said to have been \"the prime mover in the kingdom's decision to go to war in Yemen\" -- recently authorized a USD 66 million donation to support UNICEF and WHO's anti-cholera efforts there. \"We look forward to discussing this contribution with the King Salman Humanitarian Aid and Relief Centre,\" UNICEF responded in a statement [Fri 23 Jun 2017]. \"Such generosity will make a great difference to thousands of children at risk of contracting this rapidly spreading disease.\" Lake and Chan made clear [Sat 24 Jun 2017], just how rapid it's spreading -- and, in turn, just how rapid the response needs to be. \"We are working around the clock to detect and track the spread of disease and to reach people with clean water, adequate sanitation and medical treatment. Rapid response teams are going house-to-house to reach families with information about how to protect themselves by cleaning and storing drinking water,\" they said. \"We call on authorities in Yemen to strengthen their internal efforts to stop the outbreak from spreading further.\" [Byline: Colin Dwyer] -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail [The statistics of the dreadfully impressive ongoing epidemic in Yemen in 2017 are: Date (2017) / Cases / Deaths 8 May / 1360 / 25 11 May / 2752 / 51 13 May / 8595 / 115 14 May / 11 000 / 180 17 May / 17 200 / 209 19 May / 23 500 / 242 21 May / 29 300 / 315 22 May / 35 217 / 361 24 May / 42 207 / 420 27 May / 51 832 / 471 30 May / 65 300 / 532 02 Jun / 73 700 / 605 04 Jun / 86 400 / 676 05 Jun / 91 400 / 728 06 Jun / 96 000 / 746 07 Jun / 101 820 / 789 10 Jun / 116 700 / 869 12 Jun / 124 002 / 923 14 Jun / 140 116 / 989 16 Jun / 151 000 / 1054 19 Jun / 166 976 / 1146 21 Jun / 179 548 / 1205 23 Jun / 200 000 / 1310 To be consistent with past posts, the date is the day prior to the specific posting but, as this one, may not reflect the data point day. In the last 4 weeks, almost 160 000 cases and almost 900 deaths have been reported, and despite the post reporting a slowdown, with no clear sign of the numbers slowing down. - Mod.LL A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  .] [", "JAPANESE ENCEPHALITIS - TAIWAN (03): (NEW TAIPEI) ************************************************* A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Thu 22 Jun 2017 Source: Focus Taiwan [edited] A woman in New Taipei has been diagnosed with Japanese encephalitis, the 5th case of the mosquito-borne disease confirmed in Taiwan so far this year [2017], the Centers for Disease Control (CDC) said Thursday [22 Jun 2017]. The 56-year-old patient 1st sought medical attention at a local clinic on 11 Jun [2017], after she developed a fever and headache, and was hospitalized on 15 Jun [2017] with symptoms such as slurred speech and impaired movements, according to the CDC. She tested positive for Japanese encephalitis [JE] on 21 Jun [2017], the CDC said. According to CDC Deputy Director-General Chuang Jen-hsiang, the patient had never been vaccinated against Japanese encephalitis, and the source of the infection remained unknown. She may have contracted the disease during a visit earlier this month [Jun 2017] to a temple in Yunlin County, which is close to rice fields and dovecotes, or in her own neighborhood, where there are several dovecotes, Chuang said. The case is the 5th to be confirmed in Taiwan since 22 May [2017], when the 1st infection this year [2017] was recorded in Kaohsiung. In Taiwan, Japanese encephalitis is usually prevalent from May to October each year and peaks between June and July, according to the CDC. The disease is mainly transmitted by the _Culex tritaeniorhynchus_ mosquito, which is known to breed in rice fields, ponds and irrigation canals. The CDC has advised people to avoid visiting such places and animal farms, especially at dawn and dusk when mosquitoes are most active. People suffering from Japanese encephalitis can experience serious psychological and neurological symptoms, and the disease has a mortality rate as high as 20-30 percent, according to the CDC. [Byline: Chen Wei-ting and Y.F. Low] -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts [The number of JE cases continues to slowly increase in Taiwan. The specific locality where she acquired her infection is uncertain. JE virus is endemic in Taiwan and has caused cases sporadically there during the May-October season. _Culex_ mosquitoes are abundant enough there to accomplish transmission of the virus from birds and swine to people. Japanese encephalitis is a vaccine-preventable disease; the affected individual above had not been vaccinated. The only measures to prevent infection are vaccination and avoidance of mosquito bites. Maps of Taiwan can be seen at  and  . - Mod.TY] [", "SARCOCYSTOSIS, ANIMALS - IRELAND: (DONEGAL) OVINE ************************************************* A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Fri 23 Jun 2017 Source: Farm Ireland [edited] The Department of Agriculture has confirmed that over 400 carcasses of lambs were destroyed after they were found to have a disease that can be transmitted to people. Veterinary inspectors detected the disease called sarcocystosis in lambs over several weeks, and carcasses were condemned before they entered the food chain. The Food Safety Authority of Ireland (FSAI) explained that cases of people becoming infected with the sarcocystis parasite are more common in \"cultures where raw meat is commonly eaten.\" However, cases of infections among people are uncommon in Ireland. It is not listed with the Health Protection Surveillance Centre as a notifiable infectious disease. It can cause symptoms such as nausea, stomachache, and diarrhoea, which vary widely depending on the number of cysts ingested. In many cases, it is benign with no obvious signs. It is understood the outbreak has been linked back to the Donegal region. In many cases, the parasite can be passed on to sheep from contamination from dogs. \"Department veterinary inspectorate have condemned carcasses at a number of sheep slaughter plants over a number of weeks as being unfit for human consumption. The carcasses were excluded from the food chain. \"The animals have been traced, and the cause of the problem has been diagnosed by the Department Regional Laboratory as sarcocystosis,\" a spokesman for the Agriculture Department said. Each year, dozens of sheep attacks and incidents of worrying (attacking, killing, or chasing livestock) occur throughout Ireland, and the damage to a farmer's flock can be catastrophic, as well the associated financial impact and emotional distress. A spokesman said there is a comprehensive system of inspections both prior to slaughter and after slaughter at Irish meat plants. \"Where animals fail to meet the required standards, they are excluded from the food chain,\" he said. The cysts are visible to the eye on parts of the carcass and were identified by vets. Rigorous food safety procedures are in place at the country's meat plants, with Ireland exporting an estimated 50 000 tonnes of sheep meat valued at EU 240 million [USD 269 million] last year [2016]. [Byline: Louise Hogan] -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail [Symptomatic _Sarcocystis_ spp. infection in humans is very rare. _Sarcocystis_ spp. is closely related to _Toxoplasma gondii_, with a similar life cycle, forming tissue cysts and excreting sporulated oocysts in the feces of infected animals. Serosurveys in humans are not helpful, as _Sarcocystis_ spp. and _T. gondii_ show extensive cross-reactivity. An outbreak in travellers visiting the Tioman Island (Malaysia) in 2011-12 is unique (Esposito DH et al. and the Tioman Island Sarcocystosis Investigation Team. Acute muscular sarcocystosis: an international investigation among ill travelers returning from Tioman Island, Malaysia, 2011-2012. Clin Infect Dis. 2014;59:1401-10. doi: 10.1093/cid/ciu622). Infection of humans is through food and water contaminated with feces from sarcocystic-infected animals and ingestion of raw or undercooked meat from sarcocystic-infected animals. Two recent reviews discuss human sarcocystis infections: (Harris VC et al. Human Extraintestinal Sarcocystosis: What We Know, and What We don't Know. Curr Infect Dis Rep. 2015;17:49. doi: 10.1007/s11908-015-0495-4; and Fayer R et al. Human infections with Sarcocystis species. Clin Microbiol Rev. 2015;28:295-311. doi: 10.1128/CMR.00113-14). - Mod.EP] [Sarcocystosis infections in humans and animals are caused by single-celled protozoan parasites in the family of Sarcocystidae. Sarcocystis spp. have an obligatory 2-host life-cycle with a prey animal serving as the intermediate host and a predator serving as the definitive host. While most species are infective only to animals, humans can act as incidental intermediate hosts in a variety of spp., and as definitive hosts in 2 species, _S. suihominis_ and _S. bovihominis_. Human muscular sarcocystosis infections tend to be rare, and intestinal infections are often asymptomatic or very mild. Because the parasite is transmitted either fecal-orally or by the ingestion of undercooked meat containing sarcocysts, transmission can be easily prevented by simple changes in hygienic practices. The above and additional information on sarcocystis is available at  . The European Food Safety Agency (EFSA) includes sarcocystis among the parasites reviewed, though it is not a notifiable parasite. In its last (December 2016) annual report, the following information is to be found: \"In 2015, as in the previous 2 years, Belgium was the only MS [member state] which provided information on sarcocystis in cattle. Of the 874 948 cattle samples tested at slaughter (meat inspection), 107 (0.012 percent) were positive, which is comparable with a prevalence of 0.010 percent reported in 2014, and 0.007 percent in 2013. \"Reports on sarcocystis prevalence in cattle are lacking in most of the European countries. In contrast to the very low prevalence of sarcocystis in the Belgian cattle, a countrywide survey performed in Hungary by conventional PCR and sequencing found 66 percent sarcocystis-positive cattle samples at slaughter (Hornok et al., 2015). High sarcocystis prevalence was also reported in Italy by Domenis et al. (2011), where sarcocystis by histological examination was found in 78.1 percent of the tested bovine animals.\" Subscribers may also refer to  . - Mod.AS A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  .] [", "UNDIAGNOSED DEATHS, CANINE - USA (03): (CALIFORNIA) POISONING SUSPECTED, REQUEST FOR INFORMATION ************************************************************************************************ A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: 22 Jun 2017 Source: 10 News [edited] One dog is dead after possibly getting poisoned at a local park. Now, 10 News is getting reports of a 2nd dog dying after visiting the same park. The warning is posted on a hand-written flyer at the park. No one knows who put it there, but it doesn't look like the city put it there. 10 News reporter Anthony Pura spoke with one of the dog owners. She says her dog, Porky, died hours after getting home from the Grape Street Dog Park [San Diego, CA]. The 6-year-old Yorkshire Terrier died 2 days ago. His owner, who asked us to keep her name private, says the Grape Street Dog Park was the last place they visited together. Four hours after they got home, Porky started acting sick and suddenly died. After talking to other park visitors, she thinks her dog may have eaten something dangerous. Unfortunately, she can't confirm what it was. If you think your dog has been poisoned, the pet poison helpline says you should remove it from the area immediately. Do not attempt to treat your pet without 1st talking to a vet or specialist. If you need help, contact the pet poison helpline. [Byline: Marie Estrada] -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail [If this owner suspected some type of poison, she should have taken her pet to a veterinarian. A necropsy of the pet would provide the stomach contents and tissue samples for laboratory analysis, which could save the life of other pets in and around the dog park. It is a difficult decision to submit your pet for a necropsy, but the information may save others as well as give you peace of mind as to what happened to your pet. Without knowing clinical signs, it is impossible to make any rational comment on the possible toxin. - Mod.TG] [A third dog has also reportedly died, and several others have been sickened, after visiting the park ( ). ProMED-mail would greatly appreciate any additional information concerning these cases including any additional history, exam, laboratory, and/or necropysy findings, etc. - Mod.JH] A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  .] [", "NOROVIRUS (06): FRANCE (AUVERGNE-RHONE-ALPES), FIJI (WESTERN), CANADA (QUEBEC) ****************************************************************************** A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases In this update: [1] France (Auvergne-Rhone-Alpes) [2] Fiji (Western) [3] Canada (Quebec) ****** [1] France (Auvergne-Rhone-Alpes) Date: Fri 16 Jun 2017 Source: La Montagne [in French, trans. Corr.SB, edited] 57 children and adolescents attending different schools in Montmarault (Allier) showed the same symptoms on Thu [15 Jun 2017]: nausea, vomiting, diarrhea. 16 absences were recorded in nursery school, 26 in elementary school, and 15 in college. However, not all of them had lunch at the canteen. External students have also been affected. Are the water or meals taken in common at the canteen by all the affected students responsible? Is this a virus? We still do not know. The necessary action has already been undertaken to have an answer as soon as possible. Everything has been done pending the results of the samples. Tests made by the Regional Health Agency and the departmental council were carried out on the various items served at lunch. Samples were also taken from the water. The results of these analyses could be known over next week. Bottles of water were bought and distributed to the students. The consumption of tap water was suspended until further notice at the college. On Friday [16 Jun 2017], there were still 23 absences in kindergarten and 40 in primary school, while the number of absent schoolchildren was stable. -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts [Montmarault is a commune in the Allier department in central France. A HealthMap of France can be found at  . - Mod.LK] ****** [2] Fiji (Western) Date: Sun 18 Jun 2017 Source: Stuff [edited] Four Kiwi families flew to Fiji for a fabulous week together in luxury accommodation after a year of planning and saving. But things went awry when all but 2 of the group of adults and children were struck down by a mystery sickness shortly after arrival. Vomiting, diarrhoea, cramps and chills confined them to their rooms, which were at a 5-star accommodation in Denarau, near Nadi and at another resort on Malolo Island. \"It was almost like a domino effect. It was picking off one person at a time,\" said [Male B], a former ad executive who now runs a dairy farm near New Plymouth. \"The whole time we were there, there was always someone down with it. We never all got to spend an evening together.\" They still have no clue whether the gastro-type sickness came from water, food, the aircraft, airport, hotel rooms, or elsewhere. But they are warning others to be careful. \"We tried to nail it down. We couldn't put our finger on it,\" he said. [Male B] said they used only bottled water for drinking and teeth cleaning. They stayed and ate at a 5-star accommodation Sheraton on Denaurau, near Nadi, and also stayed on Manolo Island at the Plantation Resort. They met other visitors to Fiji who had also come down with a similar illness, including wedding guests who were too unwell to attend the event. There was also evidence of people having been ill on the plane. Most of the group got better in a day or 2, but one woman continued to feel unwell for several days. Her family doctor put her on a drip for several hours after she returned to Auckland because she had become so dehydrated. [Female S], who didn't want her last name used, said the medical centre sent a sample for testing, but no results have yet come back. \"It wasn't pretty\" she said of her symptoms. \"Was it the water? The hygiene? Is it a superbug? I'm really keen to know.\" she said. \"We got sick at different times during the week in Fiji. Every single night, someone was sick. They were dropping like flies.\" Dr David Sinclair from the Auckland Regional Public Health Service said gastroenteritis in travellers returning from Pacific and Asian countries was common, as their water supplies and food were easily contaminated. Illness ranged from a mild upset stomach to severe vomiting and diarrhoea. \"It is important people visit the doctor if they suspect gastroenteritis from food or water contamination,\" he said. A positive result from testing in New Zealand would be reported to public health officials. Sinclair advised travellers to such countries to eat food that has been thoroughly cooked, and only drink bottled water or sealed cold drinks. People with vomiting and diarrhoea should keep well hydrated and thoroughly wash their hands, and usually symptoms cleared in a few days, he said. If severe symptoms develop then people are advised to visit a doctor. The Safetravel website gives general health advice for travelers. [Byline: Bevan Hurley] -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts [A number of agents can cause gastroenteritis: Norovirus. Both children and adults are affected by noroviruses, the most common cause of foodborne illness worldwide. Norovirus infection can sweep through families and communities. It's especially likely to spread among people in confined spaces. In most cases, you pick up the virus from contaminated food or water, although person-to-person transmission also is possible. Rotavirus. Worldwide, this is the most common cause of viral gastroenteritis in children, who are usually infected when they put their fingers or other objects contaminated with the virus into their mouths. The infection is most severe in infants and young children. Adults infected with rotavirus may not have symptoms but can still spread the illness, a particular concern in institutional settings because infected adults unknowingly can pass the virus to others. A vaccine against viral gastroenteritis is available in some countries, including the United States, and appears to be effective in preventing the infection [However, since adults and children were infected in Fiji, the etiologic agent is likely not rotavirus. - Mod.LK]. Some shellfish, especially raw or undercooked oysters, also can make you sick. Although contaminated drinking water is a cause of viral diarrhea, in many cases, the virus is passed through the fecal-oral route, that is, someone with a virus handles food you eat without washing his or her hands after using the toilet [excerpted from  ]. Bacteria. Although not as common, bacteria such as _E. coli_ and salmonella can also trigger the stomach flu. Salmonella and campylobacter bacteria are the most common bacterial causes of gastroenteritis in the U.S. and are usually spread by undercooked poultry, eggs, or poultry juices. Salmonella can also be spread through pet reptiles or live poultry. Fiji, officially the Republic of Fiji, is an island country in Melanesia in the South Pacific Ocean, about 1100 nautical miles northeast of New Zealand's North Island. Its closest neighbours are Vanuatu to the west, New Caledonia to the southwest, New Zealand's Kermadec Islands to the southeast, Tonga to the east, the Samoas and France's Wallis and Futuna to the northeast, and Tuvalu to the north. A HealthMap of Fiji can be found at  . - Mod.LK] ****** [3] Canada (Quebec) Date: Fri 23 Jun 2017 Source: CBC [edited] The Quebec Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food (MAPAQ) has issued a warning list of raspberry and raspberry products that may have been contaminated by the norovirus. Several cases of illness have already been reported to the ministry. Those who have products on the list are asked to avoid consuming them and return them to the facility where they were purchased or discard them. \"The products that are the subject of this alert are likely to have been prepared with a batch of frozen raw raspberries that are subject to a food recall from the Canadian Inspection Agency,\" wrote the agency in an issued statement on Fri [23 Jun 2017]. People with norovirus will experience symptoms usually between 24 and 48 hours after consuming the products. Those symptoms include nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, abdominal cramps, muscle pain, fatigue, fever, chills and headaches. \"Even if the products do not show signs of alteration or suspicious odour, they are likely to be contaminated with norovirus,\" wrote the ministry. [See the URL above for the list of products at risk of contamination.] -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts [A HealthMap of Quebec Province, Canada can be found at  . - Mod.LK] [", "NON-TUBERCULOUS MYCOBACTERIA - USA: ex DOMINICAN REPUBLIC, MYCOBACTERIUM ABSCESSUS/CHELONAE, POST-PLASTIC SURGERY ***************************************************************************************************************** A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases [1] Date: Thu 22 Jun 2017 Source: WPIX TV [edited] Eight New Yorkers have been diagnosed with a bacterial skin infection linked to plastic surgery they received in the Dominican Republic, city health officials said Thursday [22 Jun 2017]. All the patients -- 10 in all, including 2 from Connecticut -- who contracted _Mycobacterium abscessus/chelonae_ are women and range in age from 28 and 39 years old. They underwent cosmetic procedures such as liposuction, tummy tucks, and breast augmentations, lifts or reductions between 2 Mar and 27 Apr [2017]. Eight of the patients were treated at Central International de Cirug\u00eda Estetica (CIPLA) in Santo Domingo. The bacteria cause surgical wound infections and can lead to abscesses, damaged or dead skin, and soft tissue, according to the New York City Department of Health. The women involved in this cluster were hospitalized, had tissue removed, and went through several weeks of intravenous antibiotics, city health commissioner Dr. Mary T. Bassett said. Pain, redness, swelling, and fluid drainage are the most common symptoms. Treatment includes draining or removing the infected tissue and prolonged use of antibiotics, according to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. City officials have issued a health alert, urging anyone who developed a skin infection after undergoing cosmetic surgery in the Dominican Republic to seek medical care right away. They also warned against so-called \"lipotourism,\" or traveling to other countries for plastic surgery at a fraction of what it would cost in the U.S. \"This recent group of serious infections due to cosmetic surgery obtained abroad underscores the danger and expense many women subject themselves to in order to pursue unrealistic beauty standards,\" State Senator Marisol Alcantara said. \"To any person who is considering travel to the Dominican Republic to obtain plastic surgery, I would urge them to reconsider, as this can be dangerous and can leave them with no legal recourse in the case of malpractice.\" Anyone who may have undergone such a procedure in the Dominican Republic and later developed a skin infection should call their doctor or the city health department at 311. Doctors who see patients with symptoms similar to those of _Mycobacterium abscessus/chelonae_ should report them to the city health department at 1-866-692-3641. [Byline: Nick Perozeni] -- Communicated by: Kathryn Soderholm ****** [2] Date: Thu 22 Jun 2017 Source: New York City Health Department [edited] The Health Department announced today [22 Jun 2017] that it has identified a cluster of _Mycobacterium abscessus/chelonae_ skin/soft tissue infections associated with cosmetic surgery performed in the Dominican Republic. There have been 8 cases identified in New York City and 2 in Connecticut this year [2017]. Patients often visited their doctors in the United States multiple times before the diagnosis of mycobacteria was suspected. The Health Department has issued a health alert urging medical providers and the public to report any suspect cases of skin and soft tissue infections in patients who report traveling to the Dominican Republic for a cosmetic procedure since January of this year [2017]. Patients have undergone treatment, including hospitalization, surgical removal of infected, damaged or dead tissue, and several-week courses of intravenous antibiotics. To date, no deaths have been identified as part of this cluster. \"We urge anyone who has received cosmetic surgery in the Dominican Republic and developed a skin infection to seek medical care immediately,\" said Health Commissioner Dr. Mary T. Bassett. \"It is important for people who may have an infection to come forward, seek medical attention, or contact the Health Department via 311. Just as important is to remind anyone who seeks elective cosmetic surgery in New York City, other U.S. states, or abroad to make sure they choose a doctor and a medical facility that is licensed.\" \"In light of reports of bacterial infection resulting from cosmetic surgeries performed in the Dominican Republic, I urge all New Yorkers to be wary of possible symptoms due to infection,\" said Congressman Adriano Espaillat (NY-13). \"The health of our citizens is paramount; if you have traveled to the Dominican Republic in the past several months for a cosmetic procedure and now experience unusual side effects, please see a doctor for examination immediately, and inform them of the nature of your surgery and travel history.\" \"Lipotourism can have serious health consequences and is no laughing matter,\" said Council Member Salamanca. \"If you or someone you know has been affected, please do not hesitate to reach out to the Health Department for assistance.\" The Health Department has been collaborating with the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) since May [2017] to investigate all cases of soft tissue and skin infections associated with \"lipotourism\" to the Dominican Republic. Similar cases have been reported to the CDC in the past, including a cluster in 2003-2004 and most recently in 2013-2014. The CDC is working with authorities in the Dominican Republic to further investigate this situation. Anyone who may have received such a procedure in the Dominican Republic and has developed a skin infection should immediately contact their licensed medical provider or the Health Department through 311. Medical providers who see patients with symptoms should report them to the Health Department at 1-866-692-3641. -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail [The following has been extracted from my moderator comments in a prior ProMED-mail report, Non-TB mycobacteria - USA: ex Dominican Rep, post-cosmetic surg infection, 2013 http://promedmail.org/post/20160715.4346308: Non-tuberculous mycobacteria (NTM) are acid-fast bacilli that are part of a grouping separate from the _M. tuberculosis_ complex ( ). NTM differ among themselves on the basis of in vitro growth rate, colonial pigmentation, and rapid molecular diagnostics. Non-pigmented, rapidly growing NTM species (RGM) include the _M. fortuitum_ complex and the _M. chelonae-abscessus_ group. More slowly growing NTM include _M. marinum_ and _M. gordonae_, _M. kansasii_ and the _M. avium/intracellulare_ complex. NTM are environmental mycobacteria, found in water and soil, that can form biofilms on the inner surfaces of drinking water distribution systems, constituting a risk for certain patients both by microaspiration or by inhalation of aerosols. Water from these systems can also contaminate medications and medical instruments. Outbreaks of infections due to RGM are generally related to subcutaneous injection of substances contaminated with the bacterium or through invasive medical procedures employing contaminated equipment or implanted devices. Infection can also occur after accidental injury where the wound is contaminated by soil. In immunocompromised patients, RGM also cause disseminated infection. Treatment of _M. abscessus/chelonae_ infections usually involves a macrolide such as clarithromycin or azithromycin plus parenteral antibiotics such as amikacin and cefoxitin and surgical debridement with removal of foreign bodies. The initial empiric regimen is modified based on antimicrobial susceptibility testing results. ProMED-mail previously reported on outbreaks of RGM disease occurring after cosmetic surgery performed in the Dominican Republic; see also's below. The Dominican Republic, with a population of about 10 million residents, occupies the eastern 2/3rds of the island of Hispaniola, in the Greater Antilles archipelago in the Caribbean region; the western 1/3rd of Hispaniola is occupied by the country of Haiti ( ). About 3 million people live in the metropolitan area of Santo Domingo, the capital city of the Dominican Republic. The Dominican Republic is a popular tourist destination in the Caribbean and has also been a destination for medical tourism ( ). - Mod.ML A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  .] [", "SARIN, LABORATORY ERRORS: DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE INVESTIGATION REPORT ******************************************************************** A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Thu 22 Jun 2017 Source: Stars and Stripes [edited] The same Army laboratory that mishandled anthrax in 2015 leading to a nationwide scare might also have lost a small amount of the chemical sarin, the Pentagon's inspector general has found. In a report released this month [June 2017], the inspector general for the Department of Defense found officials at the Army's Dugway Proving Ground in Utah and a contractor that facility was using to care for chemicals did not properly inventory its sarin, a nerve agent that can be fatal to humans if they come into contact with it. Dugway stored its sarin in a 2-container system. The sarin was stored in a primary container, which is then stored inside a secondary container. But officials only checked the secondary containers when doing inventory and did not check inside the primary container, so they did not know whether all the sarin was still in the containers, the inspector general found. \"Therefore, custodians cannot identify and account for leaks, evaporation, or theft that may have occurred,\" the inspector general found. \"Furthermore, Dugway officials did not immediately notify the chemical materials accountability officer of a 1.5-milliliter shortage of...sarin identified during a 19 Apr 2016 inventory nor did they properly document the results of that inventory,\" the investigation found. Dugway and its contractor also used different methods to seal the containers, the inspector general found. \"Dugway used stainless steel cylinders and ammunition cans sealed with tamper evident seals; and the contractor used resealable plastic containers sealed with tape, which provides no assurance that only authorized personnel had access,\" the investigation found. It would be difficult to tell whether sarin was removed from the facility or it evaporated, due to the amount that was reported missing and how it reacts with the environment, said Dan Kaszeta, a former Army chemical weapons specialist and now the managing director of Strongpoint Security, a chemical weapons consultancy based in the U.K. \"1.5 [milliliters] is actually rather a small amount,\" Kaszeta said. \"Yes, it could kill somebody, but sarin evaporates very quickly and also degrades very quickly.\" It would not last long if it got out of one of the containment jars, he said. That amount is small enough that it could be within the margin of error for measuring it, depending on what technique was used, Kaszeta said. Bruce Anderson, a spokesman for the inspector general's office, said the investigation recommended a new inventory of all the chemicals at Dugway be completed to establish a new system to better track dangerous substances. \"We found conditions that increased the risk that chemical agent operations are not conducted in a safe, secure and reliable manner,\" Anderson said. \"We believe that the Army should address the increased risk by quickly implementing corrective actions.\" Dugway is the same facility that was the source of a nationwide scare in 2015 after it was reported the facility had inadvertently shipped hundreds of samples of live anthrax to medical labs in all 50 states and 9 other countries when the samples were supposed to be inactive. The top officer at Dugway at the time, then-Colonel William King, was issued a career-ending reprimand following the incident. [Byline: Tara Copp] -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail [A milliliter is a very small amount and is likely due to evaporation. However, this is the same lab that shipped out live anthrax samples to diagnostic labs. Hence, there may be larger issues here than a tiny amount of chemical missing (which is likely due to evaporation). The larger issue here is the lack of uniformity in how the Army handles things, and how a contractor handles things. It seems there should have been a Standard Operating Procedure (SOP) in place that specified some details such as: -how often the levels of the chemicals should be checked, and was that to include primary and secondary containers? -what the canisters were to be sealed with? -how many people should be on an inspection team? -what are the procedures in the event of an exposure? -where this information was to be noted and how often? -what kind of tape for resealing the containers should be used? -what kind of training and how often should the training be performed and by whom? -where is the documentation for that training kept? There are likely other things the SOP should have contained, but from this article, it appears there was a lack of: -communication -training -specificity regarding training and inspection One wonders whether these things were spelled out for a contractor or any other inspector of the containers? This is the 2nd type of general failure at this facility the Inspector General has investigated. These issues all need correcting. The correction of these events is paramount to keeping people at the facility safe, as well as the safety of lab personnel who may receive samples (such as the anthrax samples), or the surrounding communities if a mishap were larger than a few milliliters of a evaporated chemical. If these things had been documented or tracked more closely if they were known issues, then it would be a clearer situation to understand if the tiny amount missing is from evaporation (which is likely) or from theft or mishandling. - Mod.TG A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  .] [", "ADENOVIRUS HEMORRHAGIC DISEASE, CERVIDS - USA: (OREGON) ******************************************************* A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: 23 Jun 2017 Source: The Dalles Chronicle [edited] Oregon Department of Fish and Wildlife (ODFW) biologists are seeing an outbreak of adenovirus hemorrhagic disease (AHD) in a local deer herd in The Dalles and ask that residents do not feed the animals and bury or take to the landfill any carcasses they find on their property. District Wildlife Biologist Jeremy Thompson said The Dalles office received several reports of deer dying in the Cherry Heights area during the past month. The cause of their deaths was determined as AHD when specimens were sent to the state lab. \"If these deer died from AHD, then feeding them will potentially spread this disease to other deer rapidly. It's very important people don't provide water sources or feed for deer for this reason. [This is an awkward statement. One does not feed dead dear. I think what this means is that by providing food and water to deer, the virus may transmited into the feed/water and then spread to other deer. - Mod.TG] Their bodies are built for browse and grass, not grain,\" says Thompson. AHD is a virus transmitted by direct contact between deer, making it easier to spread in areas of high deer concentrations. This is particularly a concern where people feed and water deer since it unnaturally concentrates them in a small area. Deer with AHD can have clinical signs common to other diseases that include: rapid or open mouth breathing, foaming or drooling at the mouth, diarrhea (possibly bloody), weakness and emaciation. Death can occur within 3-5 days from the time the deer are exposed to the virus. ODFW is also asking the public to report sightings of deer with these symptoms to ODFW's office in The Dalles at 541-296-4628. Thompson said the current AHD cases are not the 1st in The Dalles, and outbreaks have occurred in other parts of Oregon. He said the virus does not pose a risk to people, domestic pets, livestock, or other wildlife, nor are there any known cases of humans getting sick from AHD or getting the disease from consuming the meat of an infected deer. -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts [AHD is caused by an adenovirus. EHD (epizootic hemorrhagic disease) is caused by an orbivirus. They are different. This particular adenovirus, capable of infecting both wild and captive cervids, was 1st recognized in California deer in around 1994. The virus is closely related to bovine adenovirus-3, but the biologic properties of the 2 viruses are clearly distinct, and it does not cause disease in other animals than deer. Clinical signs of this disease in deer may be confused with some signs of pneumonia or even with bluetongue. Acutely, these signs may present themselves as diarrhea or bloody diarrhea, and open mouth breathing, and even drooling, which could lead to disease spread at feeding stations. These may progress to weakness, and the body cavity may fill with fluids. If this happens, death may occur within 3-5 days of initial exposure. If not, the animals may develop a chronic condition and present with abscesses and ulcers throughout the mouth and throat. This disease killed several thousand animals in California and has killed more than 400 cervids in Oregon so far. This virus seems to spread easily by direct animal-to-animal contact or contact with body fluids. The disease may be airborne, especially in dense or crowded populations, such as around feeders or water stations put out by people who enjoy watching the deer. Hence, the public is being encouraged to cease feeding and watering wild deer to avoid tight groupings and crowding that may spread the disease. Likewise, proper disposal of deceased deer may be important. Please call the Oregon Department of Fish and Wildlife for specific recommendations regarding disposal of dead animals in your area. - Mod.TG A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  .] [", "DIE-OFF, BEES - USA: (GEORGIA) PESTICIDES ***************************************** A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Thu 22 Jun 20107 Source: Savanna Now [edited] David Strickland knew his honeybees were in trouble when the yellow helicopter flew over his dining table at the North Beach Bar and Grill on Tuesday [20 Jun 2017] night. He hadn't received the usual warning that Mosquito Control would be spraying that day, so his bees were out foraging instead of safely inside the hive. Thousands of them were sprayed. By the next morning, dead bees covered the porches of the 4 hives he keeps on the roof of his Fort Screven home on Tybee. He has 7 hives in all. \"Our hives will live, but we lost bees out of each,\" he said. \"The largest had a couple thousand dead.\" As a hobby beekeeper, Strickland had registered with Mosquito Control to receive notification about spraying so he could protect his bees. Usually he puts a screen over the exit of each hive several hours before the scheduled spraying to keep the bees inside. But he didn't receive the notification this time. Mosquito Control and other Chatham County officials became aware of the missed notifications Wednesday [21 Jun 2017] after Strickland posted about his dead bees on Facebook. Jeffrey Heusel, director of Chatham County Mosquito Control, said the problem appeared to be a clerical error in which the 9 Tybee registrants were inadvertently omitted from that round of automated calls. Mosquito Control revised the format of its list to avoid repeating the problem, he said. A county press release issued Wednesday [21 Jun 2017] indicated county officials would contact Strickland, but that hadn't happened as of late Thursday afternoon. County spokeswoman Catherine Glasby said the legal department would consider compensation. Strickland's hives produce about 50 gallons of honey a year, with each season having a distinctive taste depending on the flowers his Italian honeybees have been visiting. \"Fall is the best. It's dark and spicy,\" Strickland said. The hives are worth up to USD 500 each, he estimated, but his loss wasn't really about the money. \"They're like our little pets,\" he said. \"We love them. This is our lifestyle.\" The county has used the automated call program for 3 years without a similar problem that Heusel was aware of. The countywide call list comprises 364 residents. Tybee has been sprayed 3 times so far this year [2017]. Before it instituted the automated calling, Mosquito Control relied on an office assistant to call everyone on the list before spraying. That system failed Strickland before. Many area beekeepers -- like those at the Coastal Empire Beekeepers Association, which has more than 100 members and monthly meetings at Oatland Island Wildlife Center -- have similar stories, he said. After they were sprayed, Stickland's bees tried to clear away the dead. \"Other bees will come and pick them up and try to fly them away from the hive,\" he said. \"It's damaging for the bees' morale.\" Mosquito Control avoids the use of its helicopter-applied Naled spray as much as possible, Heusel said, because it's expensive and reducing its application reduces the possibility of mosquitoes developing resistance. His department instead reduces mosquito habitat by ditching areas where water pools -- especially on islands -- to allow the tide to flush out standing water. It also applies growth inhibitors in storm drains, dredge sites and on the islands using a bacterial compound, _Bacillus thuringiensis_ israelensis, as well as a synthetic hormone, methoprene, that prevent larval mosquitoes from developing into adults. \"Everything is geared toward as little spraying as possible,\" said Heusel, whose Mosquito Control operates on about a USD 4 million a year budget. [One third] of that is spent on pesticides. Naled, an organophosphate, is meant to target adult mosquitoes and not other insects. It's applied here at the lowest effective dose of 0.6 ounce per acre [approximately 44 milliliters per hectare] in microdroplets, about the same width as a human hair, Heusel said. The flights are timed for around dusk when mosquitoes are more active and other insects like honeybees are winding down. \"We're trying to minimize any type of unintended impact,\" Heusel said. But the bees are evidence it doesn't always work out that way. Effingham County beekeeper Harold Ward, who was removing unwanted bees from a Landings house on Thursday [22 Jun 2017], said he had had good experiences with Mosquito Control warning him in advance about upcoming spraying. But he could still see the environmental impact of the pesticide program. Neighboring counties don't have aerial spraying programs. \"If you go up to Effingham, Bulloch or Screven, you see dragonflies and fireflies, but you don't have those in Chatham County,\" he said. \"It's because of Mosquito Control.\" In a study commissioned by the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, a Florida-based researcher found in 2015 that Naled and permethrin, even when used properly, harmed butterflies and caterpillars. Miami has since instituted limits on where it sprays to protect endangered butterflies. Heusel's focus is on preventing mosquito-borne diseases like West Nile virus and eastern equine encephalitis as well as emerging problems such as Zika. \"The bottom line is our primary mission is to try to protect the citizens of Chatham County,\" he said. \"If we can do that without affecting anything else, that's what we're going to do.\" It's the \"anything else\" that worries beekeepers like Strickland. \"I don't like getting bit either, but there has to be a better way than dumping pesticides over the whole county,\" he said. Mosquito Control offers a courtesy call for anyone in the county who wants advanced notice of spraying. Sign up online at  . [Byline: Mary Landers] -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail [While Mosquito Control offers a courtesy call, this article illustrates that the system has flaws and that back-up plans and double-checks for accurate working of the system do not seem to be in place. This is devastating to a bee keeper and can impact the productivity of the entire hive. While this person states his hives will survive, that may be a premature statement. The workings of a hive can be tremendously affected by such a high death loss of its members. A bee keeper deeply feels for the loss of his bees, the hive productivity and his income. I have many bee keepers as friends, and they almost go into mourning when a hive is so adversely affected as this article describes. Naled is an organophosphate distributed in microdroplets. This delivery system is excellent for mosquitoes, but also makes it extremely deadly to a bee. They are unable to clean themselves of microdroplets, and especially microdroplets of an organophosphate. People who are sensitive to chemicals in general, perhaps including household chemicals, could experience effects such as skin, eye and nose irritation. According to the EPA:  , \"Some people who are especially concerned may choose to take some of these steps to help reduce exposure even more. This may include people who are sensitive to chemicals and those with pre-existing respiratory problems. - Stay indoors with the windows closed during spraying. - If you are outdoors during spraying operations and you can see the spray, avoid contact with it. If you can't avoid contact, rinse your skin and eyes with water. - Wash fruits and vegetables from your garden before storing, cooking or eating. - Cover outside items like furniture and grills while the spraying is occurring. Bring pets and items like pet food dishes and children's toys indoors. Rinse any items left uncovered outside before using.\" If the EPA is so concerned about this pesticide as to recommend rinsing your skin and eyes and to even to rinse uncovered objects outside, it indicates that there is a reason to be concerned about toxicity, regardless of your perceived sensitivity. Microdroplets can absorb much faster and may cause more serious problems in the correct quantity. EPA even states (on the same website as above): \"Decisions about where and when to spray will be made by local officials. Listen for announcements in your community with the dates, times and locations of upcoming sprayings. They are usually announced a day or 2 before they are scheduled to occur.\" This kind of notice indicates the town may have failed more than just the bee keepers. Even though this bee keeper says his hives will survive, taking the payment may help him start another hive in the event this hive is weakened to the point winter may cause it to fail completely. City officials need to find multiple ways to warn citizens and bee keepers, especially of this spray or any other spraying. - Mod.TG] [Integrated results from empirical and theoretical research found that bee colony collapses are caused by interacting stress factors that affect the balance between pathogens and host immunity. Pesticides are one of these interacting stressors. - Mod.PMB A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  .] [", "LEGIONELLOSIS - AUSTRALIA (03): (VICTORIA) GYM SPA SUSPECTED ************************************************************ A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Sat 24 Jun 2017 7:38am Source: Herald Sun [edited] There are fears of a possible legionnaires' [disease] outbreak as health authorities warn of 2 people hospitalized with the disease. Both people infected with the disease reported a gym in Frankston and used its spa facilities in the lead up to their diagnosis, sparking warnings for people in the area to be on high alert. The Department of Health and Human Services confirmed [it] has shut down the spa at Core24 gym which is now under investigation. Health experts have warned anyone who may have used the spa to be on the lookout for possible symptoms. \"People who have been exposed to the potential source could still develop symptoms over the next 10 days,\" said Victoria's Deputy Chief Health Officer Dr Brett Sutton. Core24 Health Clubs Director Joe Russo said he was confident the spa water was not responsible for the outbreak. \"We have a state of the art spa sanitisation system which is monitored 24 hours days, 7 days a week by a computerised system,\" he said. \"Our records show our spa water has been maintained at the highest quality possible. We have referred this issue to our pool and spa water quality consultants and we are confident that our water will be declared safe.\" Legionnaires' disease causes flu-like symptoms such as headache, fever, chills, muscle aches and pains, followed by respiratory problems and pneumonia often developing over 3 or 4 days. Onset can be up to 10 days after initial contact. [Byline: Aneeka Simonis] -- Denis legion [ProMED-mail thanks Denis Green for his submission. A spa pool (a.k.a hot tub or whirlpool spa) can be a source for legionellosis. ProMED-mail has posted several outbreaks of legionnaires' disease traced back to a hot tub (see also's below). Culture for _Legionella_ of sputum and suspected environmental sources and genotyping the isolates will help delineate transmission pathways. The predominance of one genotype of _Legionella_ isolated from patient specimens would suggest transmission from a common source and genotyping environmental isolates of _Legionella_ can point to the possible source for those patients if the genotypes match. Frankston is an outer-suburb of Melbourne in Victoria, Australia, and is located 41 km [25.47 miles] south-east of the Melbourne city centre, at the northernmost point of the Mornington Peninsula ( ). Melbourne, with a population of about 4.6 million residents, is the capital and most populous city in the Australian state of Victoria, and the 2nd-most populous city in Australia ( ). Maps of Australia can be seen at and . - Mod.ML] [", "LASSA FEVER - WEST AFRICA (24): NIGERIA *************************************** A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Fri 16 Jun 2017 Source: Nigeria Centre for Disease Control [NCDC] Weekly Epidemiological Report 7(22) [edited] 1. Lassa fever Please note that the data reflects the routine reports i.e. all suspected cases including the laboratory positive and negative cases 1.1. A total of 10 suspected cases of Lassa fever with 4 Lab confirmed were reported from 8 LGAs (5 States) in week 22, 2017 compared with one suspected case from Karu LGA (Nasarawa State) at the same period in 2016. 1.2. Laboratory results of the 10 suspected cases were 4 positives (Edo - 4) and 6 negatives (Katsina - 3, Kogi - 1, Ogun - 1 and Taraba - 1). 1.3. Between weeks 1 and 22 (2017), 298 suspected Lassa fever cases with 64 laboratory confirmed cases and 49 deaths (CFR, 16.44 percent) from 59 LGAs (21 States) were reported compared with 717 suspected cases with 71 laboratory confirmed cases and 87 deaths (CFR, 12.15 percent) from 125 LGAs (27 States) during the same period in 2016 (Figure 1). 1.4. Between weeks 1 and 52 2016, 921 suspected Lassa fever cases with 109 laboratory confirmed cases and 119 deaths (CFR, 12.92 percent) from 144 LGAs (28 States and FCT) were reported compared with 430 suspected cases with 25 laboratory confirmed cases and 40 deaths (CFR, 9.30 percent) from 37 LGAs (14 States and FCT) during the same period in 2015 (Figure 2). 1.5. Investigation and active case search ongoing in affected States with coordination of response activities by the NCDC with support from partners. 1.5.1. National Lassa Fever Working Group meeting and weekly National Surveillance and Outbreak Response meeting on-going at NCDC to keep abreast of the current Lassa fever situation in the country. 1.5.2. Response materials for VHFs prepositioned across the country by NCDC at the beginning of the dry season 1.5.3. New VHF guidelines have been developed by the NCDC (Interim National Viral Haemorrhagic Fevers Preparedness guidelines and Standard Operating Procedures for Lassa fever management) 1.5.4. Ongoing reclassification of reported Lassa fever cases 1.5.5. Ongoing review of the variables for case-based surveillance for VHF 1.5.6. VHF case-based forms completed by affected States are being entered into the new VHF management system. This system allows for the creation of a VHF database for the country. 1.5.7. NCDC team sent to Edo State to support Lassa fever data harmonization and Updating of VHF case-based management database 1.5.8. Confirmed cases are being treated at identified treatment/isolation centers across the States with Ribavirin and necessary supportive management also instituted 1.5.9. Onsite support was earlier provided to Ogun, Nasarawa, Taraba, Ondo and Borno States by the NCDC and partners 1.5.10. Offsite support provided by NCDC/partners in all affected States 1.5.11. States are enjoined to intensify surveillance Figure 1: Map of Nigeria showing areas affected by Lassa fever, week 1- 22, 2016 and 2017 Figure 2: Map of Nigeria showing areas affected by Lassa fever, week 1 - 53, 2015 and week 1 - 52, 2016 Table of cases by state, cumulative data weeks 1-20 [1 Jan-19 May 2017]: State: Cases / Lab Confirmed / Deaths Adamawa: 6 / 0 / 2 Bauchi: 9 / 3 / 3 Cross River: 7 / 0 / 0 Ebonyi: 4 / 1 / 1 Edo: 119 / 25 / 9 Enugu: 1 / 1 / 1 FCT: 2 / 0 / 0 Gombe: 15 / 0 / 1 Jigawa: 1 / 0 / 0 Kadun: 1 / 0 / 0 Kano: 23 / 2 / 10 Katsina: 3 / 0 / 0 Kebbi: 1 / 0 / 1 Kogi: 3 / 1 / 1 Nasarawa: 28 / 6 / 2 Ogun: 10 / 1 / 0 Ondo: 13 / 6 / 2 Plateau: 7 / 5 / 5 Rivers: 6 / 1 / 0 Taraba: 38 / 12 / 9 Yobe: 1 / 0 / 1 Total: 298 / 64 / 49 -- Communicated by: Olutayo Olajide Babalobi Lecturer and Consultant Epizootiologist (One Health, Participatory Epizootiology and Veterinary ICT Research Group) Department of Veterinary Public Health and Preventive Medicine Faculty of Veterinary Medicine University of Ibadan Ibadan, Nigeria [One new state and 35 new cases were added since the previous Epidemiological Report. As noted in earlier comments, Lassa fever remains a problem in Nigeria because the virus is endemic there. Virus transmission to humans occurs when people are in contact with the reservoir rodent host, the multimammate mouse (in the genus _Mastomys_) or their excreta. Transmission also occurs in health facilities when personal protective equipment is not employed and barrier nursing practices are not adequate to protect staff from blood and secretions of infected patients. Images of _Mastomys_ mice, the rodent reservoir of Lass fever virus, can be seen at . Once again, Dr Olutayo Olajide Babalobi is thanked for sending in the above Epidemiological Report. Maps of Nigeria can be accessed at  and  . - Mod.TY ] [", "CHOLERA, DIARRHEA AND DYSENTERY UPDATE (61): AFRICA, ASIA ********************************************************* A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases In this update: Africa [1] Cholera - Sudan (North Darfur State), IDPs [2] Cholera - South Sudan (Kapoeta State) [3] Cholera, possible - Kenya (Nairobi) hotel conference guests Asia [4] Cholera - Pakistan (Khyber-Pakhtunkhwa Province) ****** Africa [1] Cholera - Sudan (North Darfur State), IDPs Date: Thu Jun 22 2017 Source: AllAfrica [edited] The cholera epidemic that has claimed hundreds of lives throughout Sudan's Nile valley has now spread to North Darfur. Nine people have reportedly died and about 82 others have been infected with cholera over the last 4 days at camp Naivasha in Shangil Tobaya locality, North Darfur. In an interview with Radio Dabanga, a camp sheikh [the ruler of a tribe] said that the disease appeared on [Sun 18 Jun 2017], at the camp and spread very quickly among the displaced. A team from the state health ministry established a camp isolation center and prevented the displaced from leaving and entering the camp. The camp market has also been closed as a precaution. The former director of Nahar Medical and Health Organization working in the area, Abdallah Rasheed, reported that on [Wed 21 Jun 2017], those 47 patients, including 4 children, were suffering from acute watery diarrhea and vomiting -- characteristic symptoms of cholera. He said that on [Wed 21 Jun 2017], a consignment of medicine arrived from the state capital of El Fasher, as well as a campaign for health education and water sources. He said the working group consisted of 6 people, 4 from El Fasher and 2 from Shangil Tobaya along with 10 volunteers. The camp sheikh said that \"the medical team from El Fasher is insufficient and too few to cover the number of patients received daily. The medicine in their possession is insufficient for the number of cases.\" He pointed out that the medical team sent an appeal to the displaced persons to immediately move any infected person to the center for treatment. He said they are towing the government line by referring to the disease as 'watery diarrhea'. -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts ****** [2] Cholera - South Sudan (Kapoeta State) Date: Wed 21 Jun 2017 Source: Radio Tamazuj [edited] A total of 17 new cases of cholera were recorded in Kapoeta Civil Hospital in South Sudan's Kapoeta State since [Sun 18 Jun 2017], a senior health official said. The hospital's medical director Mustapha Lokuru told Radio Tamazuj on [Tue 20 Jun 2017] that they received 17 new cases of cholera in the area, 5 of which have already been discharged. He pointed out that a campaign to create awareness among citizens on cholera is still ongoing in the state. Cholera is an infectious disease that causes severe watery diarrhea, which can lead to dehydration and even death if untreated. It is caused by eating food or drinking water contaminated with a bacterium called _Vibrio cholera_. -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail ****** [3] Cholera, possible - Kenya (Nairobi) hotel conference guests Date: Fri 23 Jun 2017 Source: Daily Nation [edited] Nearly 26 people are in an isolation ward at Nairobi Hospital with cholera after they ate lunch on [Tue 20 Jun 2017], served during a health conference that ended today, [Fri 23 Jun 2017]. Three of those admitted are doctors. One other person is critically ill and undergoing dialysis due to kidney failure following severe dehydration. In total, there are 33 people admitted in various Nairobi hospitals with cholera. Another person who ate at the forum, a UK national who is a doctor, suffered severe bouts of diarrhea and vomiting and is said to have flown back home for treatment. The patients were part of the 500 delegates drawn from different nationalities who were attending the 4th Kenya International Scientific Lung Health Conference at the Weston hotel in Nairobi. \"During the conference, some people developed severe vomiting and diarrhea and general ill health. \"This happened almost immediately after a meal on [Tue 20 Jun 2017]. Almost all those who ate seemed to have been affected even those who only came to the conference on [Tue 20 Jun 2017], when it was being opened,\" Dr Joseph Aluoch, who was the chairman of the Conference Organizing Committee, said. He said the symptoms were \"consistent with cholera\". Dr Aluoch said the source of the infection is suspected to have been from a \"packed lunch which contained fish\", which may have been contaminated with the cholera bacterium. Dr Aluoch added: \"As a doctor, it's clear to me the symptoms are consistent with cholera. We don't need to wait for any culture report before we start treating them for cholera..\" This differs from the position held by the Health ministry that the diarrhea and vomiting were due to food poisoning and ruled out cholera, which was suspected by most of the delegates who are health practitioners. Instead, the ministry today [Fri 23 Jun 2017] said it would not settle for the cholera diagnosis until it was confirmed in the laboratory. [Byline: Eunice Kilonzo] -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail [There remain conflicting reports regarding the number of patients affected and whether the diagnosis of cholera has been confirmed. That \"This happened almost immediately after a meal...\" could suggest that the illness is not cholera as the incubation period for symptoms to occur is generally 2-3 days after exposure. - Mod.LL] ****** Asia [4] Cholera - Pakistan (Khyber-Pakhtunkhwa Province) Date: Tue 20 Jun 2017 Source: Pakistan Observer [edited] A total of 16 members of a family have been affected by cholera in Orsoon area of Chitral. Members of the affected family told this correspondent on telephone that 16 members of the family, including women and children, have been affected due to cholera starting [Mon 19 Jun 2017] night. They said there are no healthcare facilities in their area and that the Pakistan Army personnel have provided them medicines, but their situation is deteriorating further. They wanted the provincial government to make arrangements for their treatment in the hospital. Orsoon is a mountainous area situated near the Afghan border. Due to difficult terrain, vehicles also cannot reach the area easily. Seven of them including one child, 2 female and 5 male persons were carried to Tehsil Headquarters Hospital Drosh for treatment where they were admitted but there is no electricity nor fuel in diesel generator at hospital and patients facing hardships. [Byline: Gul Hamaad Farooqi] -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts [The mortality from cholera and most diarrheal illnesses is related to non-replacement of fluid and electrolytes from the diarrheal illness. As stated in Lutwick LI, Preis J, Choi P: Cholera. In: Chronic illness and disability: the pediatric gastrointestinal tract. Greydanus DE, Atay O, Merrick J (eds). NY: Nova Bioscience, 2017 (in press), oral rehydration therapy can be life-saving in outbreaks of cholera and other forms of diarrhea: \"As reviewed by Richard Guerrant et al (1), it was in 1831 that cholera treatment could be accomplished by intravenous replacement, and, although this therapy could produce dramatic improvements, not until 1960 was it 1st recognized that there was no true destruction of the intestinal mucosa, and gastrointestinal rehydration therapy could be effective, and the therapy could dramatically reduce the intravenous needs for rehydration. Indeed, that this rehydration could be just as effective given orally as through an orogastric tube (for example, refs 2 and 3) made it possible for oral rehydration therapy (ORT) to be used in rural remote areas and truly impact on the morbidity and mortality of cholera. Indeed, Guerrant et al (1) highlights the use of oral glucose-salt packets in war-torn Bangladeshi refugees, which reduced the mortality rate from 30 percent to 3.6 percent (4) and quotes sources referring to ORT as \"potentially the most important medical advance\" of the 20th century. A variety of formulations of ORT exist, generally glucose or rice powder-based, which contain a variety of micronutrients, especially zinc (5). \"The assessment of the degree of volume loss in those with diarrhea to approximate volume and fluid losses can be found in ref 6 below. Those with severe hypovolemia should be initially rehydrated intravenously with a fluid bolus of normal saline or Ringer's lactate solution of 20-30 ml/kg followed by 100 ml/kg in the 1st 4 hours and 100 ml/kg over the next 18 hours with regular reassessment. Those with lesser degrees of hypovolemia can be rehydrated orally with a glucose or rice-derived formula with up to 4 liters in the 1st 4 hours, and those with no hypovolemia can be given ORT after each liquid stool with frequent reevaluation.\" References ---------- 1. Guerrant RL, Carneiro-Filho BA and Dillingham RA. Cholera, diarrhea, and oral rehydration therapy: triumph and indictment. Clin Infect Dis. 2003;37(3):398-405. 2. Gregorio GV, Gonzales ML, Dans LF and Martinez EG. Polymer-based oral rehydration solution for treating acute watery diarrhoea. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2009;(2):CD006519. doi: 10.1002/14651858.CD006519.pub2. 3. Gore SM, Fontaine O and Pierce NF. Impact of rice based oral rehydration solution on stool output and duration of diarrhea: meta-analysis of 13 clinical trials. BMJ 1992; 304(6822): 287-91. 4. Mahalanabis D, Choudhuri AB, Bagchi NG, Bhattacharya AK and Simpson TW. Oral fluid therapy of cholera among Bangladesh refugees. Johns Hopkins Med. 1973; 132(4): 197-205. 5. Atia AN and Buchman AL. Oral rehydration solutions in non-cholera diarrhea: a review. Am J Gastroenterol. 2009; 104(10): 2596-604, doi: 10.1038/ajg.2009.329. 6. WHO. The treatment of diarrhea, a manual for physicians and other senior health workers. 4th ed. 2005. - Mod.LL A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  .] [", "SHIGELLOSIS - USA (02): (PENNSYLVANIA, CALIFORNIA, FLORIDA) *********************************************************** A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases [1] Pennsylvania (Bedford County) Date: Wed 21 Jun 2017 Source: Wild Hunt [edited] A popular festival venue for Pagan events recently experienced an outbreak of suspected dysentery. Four Quarters Interfaith Sanctuary says it's working with the Pennsylvania Department of Health to investigate the outbreak and is taking steps to ensure the safety of future events, such as the upcoming SpiralHeart WitchCamp. On the weekend of 15 Jun 2017, the Mad Tea Party took place at Four Quarters. According to Maryland Our Community Now, \"By [Sun 18 Jun 2017], morning, reports of horrifying conditions began to emerge from festival attendees. The event page on Facebook has become an active forum for complaints as attendees report ambulance rides, hospital visits, and over 20 hours of illness after an apparent viral outbreak.\" The report also says prior events this spring at Four Quarters have also experienced similar outbreaks. Four Quarters quickly put out a message saying they were seeking answers to what caused the outbreak and asked attendees to report any health issues to the Pennsylvania Board of Health. The venue is a popular site for Pagan and New Age events because of its central location, beautiful scenery, and modern facilities such as flushing toilets. The next Pagan event to be held at Four Quarters is SpiralHeart WitchCamp. WitchCamp is \"a week long, magical, intensive in the Reclaiming Tradition\" and is scheduled to begin [Mon 10 Jul 2017]. [Byline: Cara Schulz] -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts [Although the lead in paragraph describes the illness as dysentery, the etiology of the cluster of illness is not clear. - Mod.LL] ****** [2] California (Ventura County) Date: Sat 24 Jun 2017 Source: Food Safety News [edited] Public health officials in California are praising the \"swift and decisive action\" of the Souplantation chain, which temporarily closed a restaurant in Camarillo in the midst of a shigellosis outbreak this week [week of 18-24 Jun 2017]. At least 8 people have been infected with _Shigella_, according to Ventura County Public Health officials. The public health department received notification of the outbreak [Thu 22 Jun 2017]; the same day Souplantation officials closed the restaurant. \"Through a series of interviews with those affected, it has been determined that a number of the cases reported had eaten at the Souplantation in Camarillo. Of the diners interviewed, there are a total of 8 individuals with laboratory evidence of shigellosis,\" the county reported [Fri 23 Jun 2017]. \"It is not currently clear what the source of the infection is. No one food item has been indicated. All employees are being tested and will need to be cleared before returning to work. There are approximately 40 employees at the restaurant.\" All of the food in the restaurant at the time it was closed is being discarded, according to the county news release. The Souplantation location is being \"thoroughly cleaned\" and all employees are receiving a refresher course in sanitary training. Ventura County Public Health staff is working with the county's Environmental Health department, which completed 2 inspections of the restaurant \"in the past 2 days,\" according to the Friday news release from the county. \"We're tracking these cases closely,\" said Public Health Officer Robert Levin in the county release. [Byline: Coral Beach] -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts ****** [3] Florida (Seminole County) daycare center Date: Fri 23 Jun 2017 Source: Outbreak News Today [edited] In Seminole County, Florida, health officials are reporting a shigellosis outbreak linked to an Altamonte Springs day care, according to a WFTV report. The number of people affected, including children was not disclosed. Health officials say it could take weeks, possibly months to pinpoint the source the source. \"Our epidemiology team works to contact whoever has symptoms to ask any questions to them and try to figure out how people got these bacteria,\" said Mirna Chamorro, with the Florida Department of Health. The day care involved can remain open as the investigation is ongoing, but the situation will be monitored, the report notes. Most cases of shigellosis are the result of bacteria passing from improperly washed hands from one person to the mouth of another person, often through handling contaminated objects or food. Poor hand washing and hygiene (especially after changing diapers or toileting) increases the risk of infection. People infected with shigellosis may have fever, stomach cramping, and mild or severe diarrhea, often with traces of blood or mucus in the stool. However, some infected people may not show any symptoms at all. Symptoms occur from 1-7 days after exposure, but usually within 1-3 days, and last an average of 4-7 days. -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts [_Shigella_ was discovered over 100 years ago by the Japanese microbiologist, Kiyoshi Shiga, for whom the genus is named. There are 4 species: _S. boydii_, _S. dysenteriae_, _S. flexneri_, and _S. sonnei_. _Shigella_ organisms can survive transit through the stomach since they are less susceptible to acid than other bacteria; for this reason, as few as 10 to 100 organisms can cause disease. Ingested bacteria pass into the small intestine where they multiply; large numbers of bacteria then pass into the colon, where they enter the colonic cells. Given its relatively low infectious dose, transmission can occur via contaminated food and water or via direct person-to-person spread, including sexual practices more common in MSM (men who have sex with men). Humans are the only natural reservoir for the disease. Dysentery (formerly known as flux or the bloody flux) is an inflammatory disorder of the colon, which results in severe diarrhea containing mucus and/or blood in the feces with fever, abdominal pain, and rectal tenesmus (pain while passing the diarrhea). - Mod.LL A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  .] [", "VIBRIO VULNIFICUS - CHINA: (HONG KONG) NECROTIZING FASCIITIS ************************************************************ A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Sat 24 Jun 2017 Source: Outbreak News Today [edited] Hong Kong health officials reported a sporadic case of necrotizing fasciitis due to _Vibrio vulnificus_ infection affecting a 49-year-old male with underlying illnesses. He presented with bilateral foot and ankle pain and malaise since [Mon 5 Jun 2017], attended the Accident and Emergency Department of a public hospital on [Tue 6 Jun 2017] and was admitted on the same day. The clinical diagnosis was necrotizing fasciitis. Excisional debridement of left foot was performed. Specimens of blood and left foot fluid collected on [Tue 6 Jun 2017] grew _Vibrio vulnificus_. His current condition is stable. Epidemiological investigation revealed that the patient did not have recent travel history. There was no history of wound or injury. He lived with his wife and mother-in-law, who remained asymptomatic. Investigation is ongoing. _Vibrio vulnificus_ can cause disease in those who eat contaminated seafood or have an open wound that is exposed to warm seawater containing the bacteria. Ingestion of _Vibrio vulnificus_ can cause vomiting, diarrhea and abdominal pain. _Vibrio vulnificus_ can also cause an infection of the skin when open wounds are exposed to warm seawater; these infections may lead to skin breakdown and ulcers. Healthy individuals typically develop a mild disease; however, _Vibrio vulnificus_ infections can be a serious concern for people who have weakened immune systems, particularly those with chronic liver disease. The bacterium can invade the bloodstream, causing a severe and life-threatening illness with symptoms like fever, chills, decreased blood pressure (septic shock) and blistering skin lesions. _Vibrio vulnificus_ bloodstream infections are fatal about 50 percent of the time. A recent study showed that people with these pre-existing medical conditions were 80 times more likely to develop _Vibrio vulnificus_ bloodstream infections than healthy people. -- Communicated by: ProMED-MBDS [In the absence of a direct water exposure, it is likely that the patient's exposure to _V. vulnificus_ was related to uncooked seafood such as raw oysters. The man apparently had underlying risk factors but they are not stated in the posting. The following is extracted from the \"Bad Bug Book,\" Center for Safety and Applied Nutrition, US FDA (Food and Drug Administration) at  : \"_Vibrio vulnificus_, a lactose-fermenting, halophilic, Gram-negative, opportunistic pathogen, is found in estuarine environments and associated with various marine species such as plankton, shellfish (oysters, clams, and crabs), and finfish. Environmental factors responsible for controlling numbers of _V. vulnificus_ in seafood and in the environment include temperature, pH, salinity, and amounts of dissolved organics. It may be normal flora in salt water, and acquiring this organism from shellfish or water exposure does not imply that the water is contaminated by sewage. \"Wound infections result either from contaminating an open wound with sea water harboring the organism, or by lacerating part of the body on coral, fish, etc., followed by contamination with the organism. The ingestion of _V. vulnificus_ by healthy individuals can result in gastroenteritis.\" The \"primary septicemia\" form of the disease follows consumption of raw seafood containing the organism by individuals with underlying chronic disease, particularly liver disease. The organism can also enter through damaged skin. In these individuals, the microorganism enters the blood stream, resulting in septic shock, rapidly followed by death in many cases (about 50 percent). Over 70 percent of infected individuals have distinctive bullous skin lesions (shown at  ). - Mod.LL A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  .] [", "FOOT AND MOUTH DISEASE - COLOMBIA: (ARAUCA) BOVINE, SEROTYPE O, OIE ******************************************************************* A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Sat 24 Jun 2017 Source: OIE, WAHID weekly disease information 2017; 30 (26) [edited] Foot and mouth disease, Colombia -------------------------------- Information received on 24 Jun 2017 from Dr Luis Humberto Martinez Lacouture, Gerente General, Instituto Colombiano Agropecuario (ICA), Ministerio de Agricultura y Desarrollo Rural, Bogota, Colombia Summary Report type: Immediate notification Date of start of the event: 11 Jun 2017 Date of confirmation of the event: 23 Jun 2017 Report date: 24 Jun 2017 Reason for notification: Reoccurrence of a listed disease Date of previous occurrence: 4 Aug 2009 Manifestation of disease: clinical disease Causal agent: Foot and Mouth Disease Virus Nature of diagnosis: Laboratory (advanced) This event pertains to a defined zone within the country. New outbreaks (1) Summary of outbreaks: Total outbreaks: 1 Outbreak 1: La Marota, Curipao, Tame, Arauca Date of start of the outbreak: 11 Jun 2017 Outbreak status: Continuing (or date resolved not provided) Epidemiological unit: Farm Total animals affected: Species / Susceptible / Cases / Deaths / Killed and disposed of / Slaughtered Cattle / 136 / 7 / 0 / 0 / 0 Affected population: Beef cattle, females 2 and 3 years old. Outbreak statistics: Species / Apparent morbidity rate / Apparent mortality rate / Apparent case fatality rate / Proportion susceptible animals lost* Cattle / 5.15 percent / 0 percent / 0 percent / 0 percent *Removed from the susceptible population through death, destruction and/or slaughter. Epidemiology: Source of the outbreak(s) or origin of infection: unknown or inconclusive, on-going investigation Epidemiological comments: The area has high vaccination coverage, the farm has vaccination in force and the corresponding epidemiological investigation is being carried out. Control measures: Measures applied: surveillance outside containment and/or protection zone, surveillance within containment and/or protection zone, quarantine, disinfection, vaccination permitted (if a vaccine exists), no treatment of affected animals Measures to be applied: movement control inside the country, traceability, official destruction of animal products, official disposal of carcasses, by-products and waste, stamping out, zoning Diagnostic test results: Laboratory name and type / Species / Test / Test date / Result National Veterinary Diagnosis Laboratory (National laboratory) / Cattle / antigen (Ag) detection ELISA/ 23 Jun 2017 / Positive National Veterinary Diagnosis Laboratory (National laboratory) / Cattle / polymerase chain reaction (PCR) / 23 Jun 2017 / Positive Future Reporting The event is continuing. Weekly follow-up reports will be submitted. [The location of the outbreak can be seen on the interactive map included in the OIE report at the source URL above]. -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail [The OIE suspended Colombia's status of \"FMD free zone where vaccination is practised\". According to the OIE - FMD Portal : \"Following an immediate notification received from the OIE Delegate of Colombia on an outbreak of FMD in Arauca Department, the \"FMD free status where vaccination is practised\" for a zone of Colombia resulting from the merge of 5 distinct zones designated by the Delegate of Colombia in documents addressed to the OIE Director General in January 2003, in December 2004 (2 zones), in January 2007 and in January 2009, and as recognized by the OIE World Assembly of Delegates in terms of Resolution No. 19 in May 2009, is suspended with effect from 11 June 2017\". The following map provided by the OIE (last update June 2017), shows the current FMD free zones in Colombia, see map at  . - Mod.CRD A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  .] [", "DENGUE/DHF UPDATE (07): AMERICAS, PACIFIC ****************************************** A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases In this update: Cases in various countries: Americas regional --- Cases in various countries not mentioned above or more recent case numbers. Mexico and Central America --- Mexico (Tamaulipas state) Panama (Chiriqui province) South America --- Peru:  - Lambayeque region  - Piura region  - Health Network Pacifico Sur  - Tumbes region Pacific --- Palau ****** Cases in various countries Americas --- Americas Regional WHO/PAHO report 9 Jun 2017 Reported cases of dengue fever in the Americas, by country or territory to EW 22 of 2017. Cases reported earlier than EW 19 are not included here, but are available at the above URL. -------------------------------------- Cases by Country / Week updated / Probable/ Conf./ Virus type/ DHF severe/ Deaths North America USA / 22 [week ending 02 Jun 2017] / 42 / 42 / D? / 0 / 0 Central America and Mexico Costa Rica / 21 [week ending 26 May 2017] / 1569 / 0 / D 1,2 / 0 / 0 El Salvador / 22 [week ending 02 Jun 2017] / 1604 / 37 / D? / 30 / 0 Honduras / 22 [week ending 02 Jun 2017] / 1657 / 0 / D? / 30 / 0 Mexico /19 [week ending 12 May 2017] / 2415 / 913 / D 1,2,3 / 297 / 3 Panama / 20 [week ending 19 May 2017] / 2471 / 844 / D1,2 / 7 / 0 Hispanic Caribbean Dominican Republic / 21 [week ending 26 May 2017] / 433 / 0 / D? / 21 / 1 Puerto Rico / 21 [week ending 26 May 2017] / 9 / 9 / D2 / 0 / 0 English, French, Dutch Caribbean American Virgin Islands / 19 [week ending 12 May 2017] / 1 / 1 / D? / 0 / 0 Aruba / 22 [week ending 02 Jun 2017] / 690 / 7 / D? / 0 / 0 Trinidad and Tobago / 19 [week ending 12 May 2017] / 61 / 0 / D? / 0 / 0 Andean Colombia / 22 [week ending 02 Jun 2017] / 13 687 / 8357 / D? / 142 / 45 Ecuador / 21 [week ending 26 May 2017] / 8012 / 8012 / D? / 8 / 4 Peru / 21 [week ending 26 May 2017] / 53 017 / 15 085 / D 2,3 / 137 / 54 Southern Cone Argentina / 21 [week ending 26 May 2017] / 6779 / 238 / D1 / 0 / 0 Brazil / 19 [week ending 12 May 2018] / 144 326 / 0 / D? / 82 / 23 Chile / 19 [week ending 12 May 2017] / 5 / 5 / D2 / 0 / 0 [Maps showing the location of the affected islands and countries in the Americas mentioned above and below can be accessed at  ; North America at ; Central America at ; Caribbean and South America at . - Mod.TY] Cases in various countries not mentioned above or more recent case numbers. Mexico and Central America --- Mexico (Tamaulipas state). 22 Jun 2017. (conf.) 114 cases; DHF/serious 8 cases; Municipalities most affected: Victoria 21 cases with 2 serious, 25 in Reynosa, 25 in Tampico, 23 in Matamoros, 11 in Altamira. [in Spanish] Panama (Chiriqui province). 17 Jun 2017. (registered) 30 cases; Districts most affected: Baru 17 cases, David 7 cases. [in Spanish] South America --- Peru:  - Lambayeque region. 6 Jun 2017. (Probable and conf.) more than 1800 cases. [in Spanish]  - Piura region. 17 Jun 2017. (susp.) 31 788 cases, (conf.) 8263 cases; Deaths 37. [in Spanish]  - Health Network Pacifico Sur. 14 Jun 2017. (reported) 103 cases; District most affected: Nuevo Chimbote 73 cases. [in Spanish]  - Tumbes region. 23 Jun 2017. (susp.) 750 cases, (conf.) 256 cases. [in Spanish] Pacific --- Palau. 21 Jun 2017. (reported) 200 cases; Deaths 3. [A map showing the location of Palau can be accessed at  . - Mod.TY] -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail [", "ANTHRAX - INDIA (08): (ANDRA PRADESH) HUMAN, SUSPECTED ****************************************************** A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Mon 26 Jun 2017 10:51 AM Source: The New Indian Express, Press Trust of India (PTI) [edited] As many as 5 suspected cases of anthrax were reported from Kodipunjuvalasa village, Araku valley. According to District Medical and Health Officer (DM and HO) Uma Sundari, the victims approached the King George Hospital (KGH) with complaints of skin rashes and boils on [Sat 24 Jun 2017] night and were admitted in the dermatology ward. As the 5 male victims were reported from Agency area, doctors suspect it as anthrax, which is mostly affected to those people who eat animals even without cooking them and preserving them for days together. \"We are yet to confirm with the disease, however we are treating them with antibiotics. There are more chances for anthrax in the Agency area where there are chances for patients to consume infected meat preserved for many days. We have sent the blood samples to the laboratory. The reports will come by [Tue 27 Jun 2017]\", said the DM and HO. According to the officials, there were many cases reported in Agency areas previously, but this is the 1st suspected case this year [2017]. Besides anthrax disease is much spread in the remote village between Andhra-Odisha border (AOB). -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail [Araku Valley is in northern Andra Pradesh and on the southern border of Orisha. It is in the Eastern Ghats and the tribes grown a respected organic coffee. For pictures, description, and a map, go to:  From hints in the report this might be another jerky related human outbreak. - Mod.MHJ A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  .] [", "RECOMBINANT BACILLUS ANTHRACIS - USA: NEW AVIRULENT STRAIN ********************************************************** A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Wed 21 Jun 2017 Source: Global Biodefense [edited] The Defense Biological Product Assurance Office (DBPAO), a component of the Joint Program Executive Office for Chemical and Biological Defense, has announced the development of a Biological Select Agents and Toxins (BSAT) surrogate solution that will mitigate the risks associated with shipment and use of Bacillus anthracis. In addition to risk mitigation for Department of Defense (DoD) stakeholders and the community at large, this product demonstrates DBPAO's commitment to providing quality reagents to the DoD and to the biodefense community. In 2015, former Secretary of the Army (SECARMY), John McHugh, placed a moratorium on the production, shipment, and handling of any live or inactivated BSAT or BSAT derivative at Dugway Proving Ground and subsequently extended the moratorium to all other DoD laboratories and facilities. McHugh's successor, former SECARMY Eric Fanning, issued Army Directive 2016-24 (Department of Defense Biological Select Agent and Toxins Biosafety Program) in July 2016, assigning responsibilities and functions of the DoD BSAT Program to the Army Surgeon General allowing the resumption of production, shipment, and handling of non-BSAT materials. Under this mandate, the DBPAO assumed the responsibility of exploring alternatives to substitute for BSAT and BSAT-related products that mitigate hazards associated with their use. To accomplish this task, the DBPAO developed a _Bacillus anthracis_ surrogate strain named Recombinant Bacillus anthracis with Assay Targets (rBaSwAT) using a recombinant DNA approach to create a BSL-2-level genetically modified organism that will allow continuation of operations with reduced risk. The strain is built in a novel, non-virulent _Bacillus anthracis_ background and carries a comprehensive complement of anthrax specific molecular and immunological markers. Even though rBaSwAT has the required markers to replace _Bacillus anthracis_ in operations, it remains non-virulent. rBaSwAT was developed specifically for this effort, is user specific and may not work for all end-users. However, it may be further modified with additional or alternate user-specific assay signatures to create a panel of non-virulent strains relevant to current DBPAO costumers. These modified novel _Bacillus anthracis_ strain panels can be used as a surrogate for Bacillus anthracis by end users in a variety of applications. Dr Shanmuga Sozhamannan, the technical coordinator of the DBPAO as well as the driving force behind the DBPAO surrogate solution, led the following team of government scientists who proved integral to the success of this solution: Naval Medical Research Center Contribution: Design of the construct; assay testing; spore inactivation; and final product validation. \u2022 Dr Joan Gebhardt \u2022 Dr Mark Munson United States Army Medical Research Institute of Infectious Disease Contribution: Animal study and characterization. \u2022 Dr Chris Cote \u2022 Dr Dave Rozak \u2022 Dr Terry Abshire Edgewood Chemical Biological Center Contribution: Whole genome sequencing. \u2022 Dr Cory Bernhards \u2022 Dr Nicole Rosenzweig \u2022 Ms Rebecca Rossmaier \u2022 Ms Tracey Biggs Naval Surface Warfare Center Contribution: Spore production and bridging studies. \u2022 Dr Tony Buhr \u2022 Dr Linda Beck \u2022 Dr Andrea Staab Food and Drug Administration Contribution: Genetic manipulation and strain construction. \u2022 Dr Roger Plaut \u2022 Dr Scott Stibitz The rBaSwAT surrogate, developed by the DBPAO, is an innovative solution that represents the future of the DBPAO's approach to mitigate the risks associated with inactivated, virulent pathogens. A scientifically proven alternative to the use of Bacillus anthracis, this surrogate solution will provide significant hazard reduction in research, development, and testing initiatives. In addition, surrogate use has the potential to reduce costs by eliminating the burdens associated with safely and securely shipping and using BSAT. rBaSwAT is the 1st step by the DBPAO to provide surrogate solutions for BSAT use that will reduce the costs and mitigate the risks for the DoD and all DBPAO customers. The rBaSwAT surrogate is available through the DBPAO Ordering System for Assays and Reagents (OSCAR). -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail [As someone who studied anthrax outbreaks over many decades and when field strains could be mailed without fuss, the present maximum security preconditions are a show stopper. Hopefully this rBaSwAT surrogate and its variants will allow research to get back up into the saddle and be productive. Deep thanks to all those involved in the development of this avirulent strain. - Mod.MHJ A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  .] [", "CIGUATERA FISH POISONING - EU (03): POSSIBLE LOCAL FISH SOURCE ************************************************************** A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Tue 20 Jun 2017 Source: EpiCore Global Surveillance Project [edited] We have report of the following number of statutorily notifiable cases in Portugal for the most recent years: 2016 - Data not available yet 2015 - 1 case 2014 - 7 cases 2013 - 2 cases These cases are reported through the ICD codes corresponding to CFP. But we have no further confirmation or details on cases (and no lab test is available to detect in humans, so diagnosis is only clinical). Lab confirmed fish caught in the \"Selvagens\" islands ( ), between Madeira and the Canary Islands has been reported (around 2008-2010) but we are unaware of any recent cases being detected. Also unaware if routine surveillance is implemented. -- Communicated by: EpiCore Surveillance Project member Ricardo Mexia Portugal National Health Institute [ProMED thanks Ricardo Mexia for his contribution via the EpiCore Global Surveillance Project. - Mod.LL A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  .] [", "CHIKUNGUNYA (21) - AMERICAS, ASIA, OBSERVATIONS, RESEARCH ********************************************************* A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases In this update: Cases in various countries: Regional summaries --- Americas --- Regional summary WHO/PAHO report Mexico and Central America --- Mexico (Tamaulipas state) South America --- Brazil (Aracaju city, Sergipe State Asia --- India: - Chandigarh, Haryana and Punjab states - Delhi area - Bhor city, Pune district, Maharashtra state ****** Cases in various countries: Regional summaries --- Americas --- WHO/PAHO report 23 Jun 2017 Reported cases of chikungunya fever in the Americas, by country or territory - 2017 to EW 25 [week ending 23 Jun 2017]. Cases before EW 22 are not given but are available at the above URL. ---------------------------------------------------------------------- Cases by Country / Week / (Local Susp. / Local Conf. / Imported Conf. / Deaths North America --- Mexico / week 23 [week ending 9 Jun 2017] / 0 / 15 / 0 / 0 USA / week 24 [week ending 16 Jun 2017] / 0 / 0 / 9 / 0 Central American Isthmus --- Costa Rica / week 22 [week ending 2 Jun 2017] / 163 / 0 / 0 / 0 El Salvador / week 23 [week ending 9 Jun 2017] / 292 / 0 / 0 / 0 Nicaragua / week 24 [week ending 16 Jun 2017] / 448 / 8 / 0 / 0 Panama / week 22 [week ending 2 Jun 2017] / 774 / 8 / 1 / 0 Latin Caribbean --- Guadeloupe / week 22 [week ending 2 Jun 2017] / 0 / 9 / 0 / 0 Martinique / week 22 [week ending 2 Jun 2017] / 0 / 14 / 0 / 0 Puerto Rico / week 22 [week ending 2 Jun 2017] / 0 / 8 / 0 / 0 Saint Martin / week 22 [week ending 2 Jun 2017] / 0 / 3 / 0 / 0 Andean Area --- Colombia / week 23 [week ending 9 Jun 2017] / 612 / 7 / 0 / 0 Ecuador / week 23 [week ending 9 Jun 2017] / 0 /155 / 0 / 0 Peru / week 23 [week ending 9 Jun 2017] / 821 / 361 / 0 / 0 Southern Cone (no recent reports) --- -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail [Maps showing the location of the affected islands and countries mentioned above and below can be accessed at  ; North America at ; Central America at ; Caribbean at and South America at . - Mod.TY] Cases in various countries not mentioned above or with more recent case numbers. Mexico and Central America --- Mexico (Tamaulipas state). 23 Jun 2017. (conf.) 1 case. [in Spanish] [No recent reports from Central America] South America --- Brazil (Aracaju city, Sergipe State). 14 Jun 2017. (reported) the 1st identification of the East-Central-South-African (ECSA) chikungunya virus genotype naturally infecting _Aedes aegypti_ mosquitoes in Brazil. -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail Rapporteur Mary Marshall Asia --- India: - Chandigarh, Haryana and Punjab states. 15 Jun 2017. (reported) 60 cases. [Maps of India can be accessed at  and at  . - Mod.TY] - Delhi area. 20 Jun 2017. (reported) 146 cases: Municipality most affected: Delhi 105 cases. - Bhor city, Pune district, Maharashtra state. 20 Jun 2017. (susp.) over 100 cases in the last week. -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail and Roland Hubner Superior Health Council Brussels Belgium [", "PLAGUE - USA (08) : (NEW MEXICO) ******************************** A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases [1] Date: Mon 26 Jun 2017 Source: New Mexico Department of Health [edited] The New Mexico Department of Health (NMDOH) is reporting 2 recent confirmed plague cases in 52-year-old and 62-year-old females from Santa Fe County. With the addition of these cases, there have been 3 human plague cases from Santa Fe County in 2017. All 3 cases required hospitalization. There have been no deaths from plague in 2017. NMDOH conducted environmental investigations around the homes of the patients to look for ongoing risk and to ensure the safety of the immediate family and neighbors. Plague is a bacterial disease of rodents and is generally transmitted to humans through the bites of infected fleas, but can also be transmitted by direct contact with infected animals, including rodents, wildlife and pets. Plague can be present in fleas that infest wild rodents in Santa Fe County, including the city limits of Santa Fe, and several other New Mexico counties. \"Pets that are allowed to roam and hunt can bring infected fleas from dead rodents back into the home, putting you and your children at risk,\" said Dr. Paul Ettestad, public health veterinarian for the Department of Health. \"Keeping your pets at home or on a leash and using an appropriate flea control product is important to protect you and your family.\" -- Communicated by: Paul Ettestad DVM, MS State Public Health Veterinarian Infectious Disease Epidemiology Bureau Epidemiology and Response Division New Mexico Department of Health ****** [2] Date: Mon 26 June 2017 From: Paul Ettestad [edited] These cases all come from various locations in Santa Fe County so there is no single focal point of plague activity. New Mexico has had laboratory confirmed plague cases in 5 cats and 12 dogs from various counties in North Central New Mexico (Santa Fe, Torrance, Los Alamos, Sandoval, Bernalillo, Rio Arriba, and Taos counties) so plague activity is fairly widespread in this area.\" -- Communicated by: Paul Ettestad DVM, MS State Public Health Veterinarian Infectious Disease Epidemiology Bureau Epidemiology and Response Division New Mexico Department of Health [The manifestations of _Yersinia pestis_ infection in this case, the 2nd and 3rd for 2017, are not stated in the report but it is likely to have been bubonic plague. 2015 was a \"banner year\" for _Y. pestis_ infections in the USA with 15 cases and 4 deaths. In recent decades, an average of 7 human plague cases have been reported each year (range: 1-17 cases per year) with 0-2 deaths. The following was extracted from: Prentice MB, Rahalison L. Plague. Lancet. 2007; 369(9568): 1196-207, with the citations removed: \"Some plague cases (10-25 percent) present with primary septicemia (hypotension, shock) without lymph nodes being obviously affected and these patients have higher mortality than those with bubonic plague. The term septicemic plague can be confusing, since most patients with buboes have detectable bacteremia at some stage and can also have high-density bacteremia with systemic signs of sepsis. Debate about whether septicemic plague is always secondary to frank or subclinical bubonic or pneumonic disease continues, but work in mice lends support to the existence of a syndrome of septicemic disease without histological changes in lymph nodes in a few animals infected by flea bites.\" - Mod.LL A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  .] [", "NON-TUBERCULOUS MYCOBACTERIA, NOSOCOMIAL: BACKGROUND **************************************************** A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Mon 26 Jun 2017 Source: GIDEON (Global Infectious Disease Epidemiology Network) [edited] Re: ProMED-mail post Non-TB mycobacteria - USA: ex Dominican Rep, M. abscessus/chelonae, post-surgery http://promedmail.org/post/20170625.5130300 ---------------------------------------------------------------------- To date, 114 known outbreaks of human infection by non-tuberculous mycobacteria (NTM) have been associated with medical/other invasive procedures. 37 of these (32 percent) have been reported from the United States. The following chronology is abstracted from the Gideon e-book series (1). Primary references are available from the author. - 1987: 17 cases of _Mycobacterium chelonae_ otitis media in Louisiana caused by contaminated water used by an ENT practice - 1988: 8 cases of _Mycobacterium chelonae_ infection associated with a contaminated jet injector used in a podiatry office. - 1989 to 1990: 16 cases of _Mycobacterium fortuitum_ respiratory tract colonization in Washington, DC among patients on an alcoholism rehabilitation ward. - 1991: *6 cases of _Mycobacterium fortuitum_ infection in Washington, related to contaminated electromyography needles. - 1995 to 1996: 87 cases (in 16 states) of _Mycobacterium abscessus_ soft tissue infection associated with use of a contaminated adrenal cortex extract. - 1998: 6 cases of _Mycobacterium mucogenicum_ bacteremia among bone marrow transplant and oncology patients in Minnesota, related to use of contaminated water in a hematology-oncology unit. - 1999: 10 cases of _Mycobacterium abscessus_ arthritis in Texas associated with contaminated benzalkonium chloride used in injections. - 2000 to 2001: 110 cases of _Mycobacterium fortuitum_ skin infection in California, associated with contaminated footbaths at a nail salon. - 2001: Outbreak of _Mycobacterium chelonae_ keratitis in California, associated with laser in situ keratomileusis (LASIK) performed in an ophthalmology clinic. - 2001 to 2002: Outbreak of _Mycobacterium simiae_ infections in a Texas hospital was associated with contaminated tap water. - 2002: * 34 cases of _Mycobacterium chelonae_ soft tissue infection in California, associated with liposuction procedures. - 2002: 115 cases of _Mycobacterium fortuitum_ infection in California, associated with contaminated footbaths at a nail salon. - 2002: 11 cases of _Mycobacterium abscessus_ soft tissue infections in New York City, associated with injection of cosmetic substances by unlicensed practitioners. - 2002 to 2003: 4 cases of _Mycobacterium chelonae_ infection in New Jersey, associated with injection of contaminated methylene blue solution into patients undergoing rhytidectomies. - 2003: 3 cases of _Mycobacterium goodii_ infections at a hospital in Colorado, associated with contaminated surgical implants. - 2004: 12 cases of _Mycobacterium abscessus_ soft tissue infection, among Americans undergoing cosmetic surgery at various clinics in the Dominican Republic. - 2004: 143 cases of _Mycobacterium fortuitum_ skin and soft tissue infections in California, associated with a nail salon. - 2008: 4 cases of _Mycobacterium mucogenicum_ bacteremia in North Carolina, among sickle-cell anemia patients. - 2008 to 2011: 6 cases of _Mycobacterium wolinskyi_ infection among patients on a cardiothoracic surgery unit in Minnesota. - 2009: *6 cases of _Mycobacterium chelonae_ infection related to contaminated needles used in a tattoo parlor. - 2009: 2 cases of _Mycobacterium haemophilum_ infection in Washington, associated with a tattoo parlor. - 2009: 5 cases of _Mycobacterium abscessus_ infection reported at a cystic fibrosis center in Washington. - 2011: *11 cases of _Mycobacterium porcinum_ infection in Texas, related to contaminated drinking water. - 2011: *3 cases of _Mycobacterium bolletii_/_M. massiliense furunculosis_ in North Carolina, associated with a nail salon. - 2011: * Outbreak of _Mycobacterium abscessus_ infections in Florida, associated with outpatient rhytidectomies. - 2011 to 2012: 19 cases of _Mycobacterium chelonae_ involving multiple states, associated with contaminated needles used in tattoo parlors. - 2011 to 2012: 15 cases of infection due to rapidly-growing _Mycobacterium_ species, among transplant recipients on a hematopoietic stem cell transplantation unit in Minnesota. - 2012: 19 cases of _Mycobacterium abscessus_ infection, among cystic fibrosis patients at a hospital in Hawaii. - 2013: 2 cases among patients at a North Carolina cosmetic surgery clinic, associated with fractionated CO2 laser resurfacing procedures. - 2013 to 2014: 19 cases of _Mycobacterium abscessus_ and _Mycobacterium fortuitum_ infections among Americans who traveled to the Dominican Republic for cosmetic surgery. - 2013 to 2015: 95 cases of _Mycobacterium abscessus_ infection at a hospital in North Carolina, associated with contaminated tap water. - 2013 to 2014: 39 cases of _Mycobacterium abscessus infection among transplant recipients in California, associated with a contaminated environmental water source. - 2014: 15 cases of _Mycobacterium abscessus_ infection at a South Carolina hospital, associated with contact between equipment and contaminated tap water. - 2015: 2 cases of _Mycobacterium chelonae_ keratitis in Ohio, associated with use of contaminated humidifier in a laser in situ keratomileusis (LASIK) clinic. - 2015: 9 cases of _Mycobacterium abscessus_ odontogenic infections at a Georgia practice, among children undergoing dental pulpotomy. - 2015: Outbreaks of _Mycobacterium chimaera_ infections in Switzerland, the Netherlands, Germany, the United Kingdom, and the United States (Pennsylvania) associated with a contaminated heater-cooler water unit manufactured in Germany, and subsequently in the United Kingdom. - 2016: 58 cases of _Mycobacterium abscessus_ wound infection in California, associated with use of contaminated water during root-canal surgery at a dental practice. * year of publication Reference --------- 1. Berger SA, 2017. Gideon Guide to Outbreaks. 1181 pages; 5170 tables; 47 454 references. Gideon e-books, -- Communicated by: Prof. Steve Berger Geographic Medicine Tel Aviv Medical Center Israel [ProMED-mail thanks Dr. Steve Berger for his submission. Non-tuberculous mycobacteria (NTM) are a diverse group of acid-fast bacilli that are separate from the _M. tuberculosis_ complex ( ). NTM differ among themselves on the basis of in vitro growth rate, colonial pigmentation, and rapid molecular diagnostics. Rapidly growing NTM mycobacteria (RGM) usually form colonies within 7 days of in vitro incubation as opposed to slow-growing mycobacteria that require longer incubation. _M. fortuitum_ complex and the _M. chelonae-abscessus_ group are RGM, which also includes _Mycobacterium goodii_, _Mycobacterium mucogenicum_, _Mycobacterium wolinskyi_, Mycobacterium porcinum_, and _Mycobacterium bolletii_/_M. massiliense_ that are mentioned in the listing above. More slowly growing NTM species that are included in the above listing are _Mycobacterium simiae_, _Mycobacterium haemophilum_ and _Mycobacterium chimaera_. - Mod.ML] [", "SALMONELLOSIS, SEROTYPE ENTERITIDIS - CANADA: FROZEN CHICKEN PRODUCTS ********************************************************************* A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Mon 26 Jun 2017 Source: Public Health Agency of Canada [edited] Public Health Notice -- Outbreak of _Salmonella_ infections linked to frozen raw breaded chicken products -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- The Public Health Agency of Canada is collaborating with provincial public health partners, the Canadian Food Inspection Agency, and Health Canada to investigate an outbreak of _Salmonella [enterica_ serotype] Enteritidis infections in 4 provinces with cases of human illness linked to frozen raw breaded chicken products. _Salmonella_ is commonly found in raw chicken and frozen raw breaded chicken products. The risk to Canadians is low and illnesses can be avoided if safe food handling, preparation, and cooking practices are followed when preparing these types of food products. This outbreak is a reminder that frozen raw breaded chicken products contain raw poultry and should be handled and prepared no differently from other raw poultry products. Follow cooking instructions carefully and verify the internal temperature after cooking, as recommended, before consuming these products. Frozen raw breaded chicken products must be cooked to a safe internal temperature of at least 74 deg C (165 deg F) to ensure they are safe to eat. Investigation summary --------------------- Currently, there are 7 cases of salmonellosis in 4 provinces: British Columbia (1), Alberta (4), Ontario (1), and New Brunswick (1). 2 people have been hospitalized. No deaths have been reported. Individuals became sick between April and May of 2017. The majority of cases (71 percent) are male. The average age of cases is 26 years. Based on the investigation findings to date, exposure to frozen raw breaded chicken products has been identified as a source of illness. The outbreak investigation is active, and the public health notice will be updated on a regular basis as the investigation evolves. Who is most at risk? -------------------- Anyone can become sick with salmonellosis, but infants, children, seniors, and those with weakened immune systems are at higher risk of serious illness because their immune systems are more fragile than healthy individuals. Most people who become ill from salmonellosis will recover fully after a few days. It is possible for some people to be infected with the bacterium and not get sick or show any symptoms, but still be able to spread the infection to others. What you should do to protect your health? ------------------------------------------ While frozen raw breaded chicken products may appear to be pre-cooked or browned, they contain raw chicken and should be handled and prepared no differently from other raw poultry products. If you are preparing frozen raw breaded chicken products, such as nuggets, strips, or burgers, the following precautions should be taken to protect your health: - do not eat raw or undercooked frozen breaded chicken products. Cook all frozen breaded products to an internal temperature of at least 74 deg C (165 deg F) to ensure they are safe to eat; - because of uneven heating, microwave cooking of frozen raw breaded poultry products including chicken nuggets, strips, or burgers is not recommended. Always follow package cooking instructions, including products labelled Uncooked, Cook and Serve, Ready to Cook, and Oven Ready; - wash your hands thoroughly with soap and warm water before and after handling frozen raw breaded chicken products; - use a separate plate, cutting board, and utensils when handling frozen raw breaded chicken products to prevent the spread of harmful bacteria; - use a digital food thermometer to verify that frozen raw breaded chicken products have reached at least 74 deg C (165 deg F). Insert the digital food thermometer through the side of the product, all the way to the middle. Oven-safe meat thermometers that are designed for testing whole poultry and roasts during cooking are not suitable for testing nuggets, strips or burgers. -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail [The key to preventing foodborne salmonellosis is a combination of adequate cooking and appropriate kitchen hygiene as outlined in this posting. It is important to know that microwave cooking can be inadequate because the potential for uneven heating in these devices. - Mod.LL A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  .] [", "CHOLERA, DIARRHEA AND DYSENTERY UPDATE (62): ASIA (YEMEN) ********************************************************* A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Tue 27 Jun 2017 Source: Medical Xpress [edited] A cholera outbreak in Yemen, which has claimed 1400 lives in 2 months, shows tentative signs of slowing as fatality rates drop by half, the WHO said on Tue 27 Jun 2017 Nearly 219 000 suspected cases have been registered since 27 Apr 2017 and more than 1400 people have died, the UN agency said. The collapse of Yemen's infrastructure after more than 2 years of war between the Saudi-backed government and Shiite rebels who control the capital has made for a \"perfect storm for cholera,\" the WHO's senior emergency adviser for Yemen, Ahmed Zouiten, said. But fatality rates have dropped from 1.7 percent in early May 2017 to 0.6 percent now, he added. He attributed the fall to emergency intervention by health workers. Reported cases of cholera have also dropped in recent days with 39 000 over the past week compared with an average of 41 000 in previous weeks. But Zouiten cautioned that the decline in numbers might be due to underreporting over the Muslim Eid al-Fitr holiday [25-26 Jun 2017]. He said the total number of cases could still double before the outbreak ends. The UN has warned 300 000 people could contract the highly contagious infection by September 2017. Hospitals have struggled to cope with the outbreak. The war has left less than half of the impoverished country's medical facilities functional. It has also pushed Yemen to the brink of famine, with some 17 million people --2/3 of the population -- uncertain of where their next meal will come from, according to the World Food Programme. -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail [The statistics of the dreadfully impressive ongoing epidemic in Yemen in 2017 are: Date (2017) / Cases / Deaths 8 May / 1360 / 25 11 May / 2752 / 51 13 May / 8595 / 115 14 May / 11 000 / 180 17 May / 17 200 / 209 19 May / 23 500 / 242 21 May / 29 300 / 315 22 May / 35 217 / 361 24 May / 42 207 / 420 27 May / 51 832 / 471 30 May / 65 300 / 532 02 Jun / 73 700 / 605 04 Jun / 86 400 / 676 05 Jun / 91 400 / 728 06 Jun / 96 000 / 746 07 Jun / 101 820 / 789 10 Jun / 116 700 / 869 12 Jun / 124 002 / 923 14 Jun / 140 116 / 989 16 Jun / 151 000 / 1054 19 Jun / 166 976 / 1146 21 Jun / 179 548 / 1205 23 Jun / 200 000 / 1310 26 Jun / 219 000 / 1400 To be consistent with past posts, the date is the day prior to the specific posting but, as this one, may not reflect the data point day. In the last 4 weeks, almost 170 000 cases and more than 900 deaths have been reported, with no clear sign of the numbers slowing down, despite the post reporting a slowdown. - Mod.LL A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  .] [", "SCRUB TYPHUS - NEPAL (05): (CHITWAN, NAWALPARASI) ************************************************* A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases [1] Date: Tue 27 Jun 2017 From: Sher Bahadur Pun [edited] On [Tue 27 Jun 2017], a 23-year old female resident of Bharatpur, Chitwan district visited as outpatient to Sukraraj Tropical and Infectious Disease Hospital with a 20-day history of high grade fever with chills, vomiting, severe pain behind the eyes and shortness of breath. No rash or eschar was seen. The patient tested positive for scrub typhus, indicating that scrub typhus is perhaps [starting to spread] in Chitwan district, which was the district worst affected by scrub typhus last year [2016]. According to her, scrub typhus detection kits are out of stock and unavailable in government hospitals. Thus, diagnostic kits are urgently needed for early identification and accurate treatment to prevent from scrub typhus-related complications in the coming days. -- Dr.Sher Bahadur Pun, MD, PhD Clinical Research Unit Sukraraj Tropical and Infectious Disease Hospital Kathmandu, Nepal ****** [2] Date: Thu 22 Jun 2017, 6:03 PM Source: Kathmandu Post [edited] A halt in the supply of kits required for diagnosing scrub typhus from the government-level here has forced people in need to visit the private health facility. According to the District Public Health Office (DPHO), Chitwan, the Office has not received the scrub typhus kits from the center for the past 4 months. Prior to this, the Office would obtain kits from the Department of Health Services and provide [them] to the Bharatpur Hospital. The facility for testing scrub typhus bacteria (_Orientia tsutsugamushi_, [formerly] known as _Rickettsia tsutsugamushi_) is currently available only in the Chitwan Medical College. The college charges Rs 2500 [USD 24.28] per test. The service is free in government hospitals. DPHO, Chitwan officiating Chief Narhari Sharma said efforts were on to get kits from the center, but to no avail. He said he had no idea why the center was not sending kits to the district. A total of 4 people have died from this bacterial disease that is transmitted by mites in the current fiscal year. According DPHO Kit controller Ram KC, to date since the beginning of the current fiscal, 1627 suspected patients underwent the test for scrub typhus and 504 were positive. It seems that the chances of transmission of scrub typhus bacteria are relatively higher in the months of Kattik and Asoj (mid-September to mid-November) as 166 and 112 scrub typhus cases were recorded in these months last year [2016]. -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts ****** [3] Date: Tue 20 Jun 2017, 4:15 PM Source: Republica [edited] A total of 4 new cases of scrub typhus have been detected in Chitwan in the past 2 months. The District Public Health Office (DPHO), Chitwan confirmed the detection of 4 new cases of scrub typhus in the period of 2 months (mid-April to mid-June); 4 women - 3 from the district and 1 from Nawalparasi -, tested positive for _Orientia tsutsugamushi_ ([formerly] _Rickettsia tsutsugamushi_), the bacteria that causes the disease. According to DPHO Chitwan's Ram Kumar KC, they are being treated at the Chitwan Medical College. The district had 1st reported scrub typhus last year [2016], further finding 533 infected altogether. Of them, 5 had died. Last year [2016], 47 districts across the country reported the 830 cases of this mite-borne disease and 14 had succumbed to it, according to Epidemiology and Disease Control Division's Public Health Officer Resham Lamichhane. -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts [ProMED-mail thanks Dr Pun for his submission. There have been prior reports on scrub typhus cases in Nepal earlier this year (2017) and last year (see also's below). Scrub typhus is transmitted by the bite of a 6-legged chigger, the larval form of the trombiculid family of 8-legged mites. Chiggers are most active during warmer summer months ( ). Chiggers live in shaded grassy areas and tend to be more abundant during rainy spells because they need a high-level of humidity in order to survive. During the heat of the afternoon or during long dry spells, they may retreat toward the moist soil. Once chiggers have fed on humans, they drop off of their host and transform into nymphs, which then develop into adult mites that feed on plant material and are harmless to humans. Chitwan is a district in Central Region of Nepal and Nawalparasi is an adjacent district in the Western region. Maps of Nepal can be seen at  (regions and districts) and  . - Mod.ML] [", "HANTAVIRUS - AMERICAS (36): USA (WASHINGTON) ********************************************* A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Mon 26 Jun 2017 Source; KRO 7 [edited] A case of the deadly [Sin Nombre] hantavirus has been confirmed in Skagit County, officials said. This case is one of 4 hantavirus [infection] cases this year [2017] that has been confirmed in Washington State. The disease can be deadly, and roughly one in 3 people who contract the virus have died. Hantavirus is carried by deer mice and is found in their urine [saliva] and droppings. Individuals can become infected if they breathe in contaminated dust or particles or if they touch rodent urine, droppings or nest materials and then touch their eyes, mouth or nose, health officials said. The virus is not spread through person-to-person contact. The CDC recommends the following steps if you plan to clean potentially rodent-infested areas: - Do not stir up dust by vacuuming, sweeping, or any other dust-generating means. - Wear rubber, latex, vinyl or nitrile gloves. - Thoroughly wet contaminated areas including droppings, dead mice, and nests with a bleach solution or household disinfectant. Bleach solution: Mix 1.5 cups [355 ml] of household bleach in one gallon [3.8 liters] of water. Use only freshly mixed solution. - Once everything is soaked for 10 minutes, remove all of the nest material, mice or droppings with a damp towel and then mop or sponge the area with bleach solution or household disinfectant. - Spray dead rodents with disinfectant, and then double-bag along with all cleaning materials and debris. Throw out rodent in an appropriate waste disposal system. Symptoms of hantavirus [infections] appear between 1-8 weeks after exposure and include the sudden onset of flu-like symptoms: Fever, head and muscle aches, followed by shortness of breath or other breathing issues. People who have recently been in areas where rodents are likely to nest, and are experiencing these symptoms, are encouraged to contact their healthcare provider. -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts [The hantavirus involved in the report above is not stated, but Sin Nombre virus is very likely involved. Sin Nombre hantavirus is endemic in the western USA, including Washington State. Deer mice commonly move into dwellings with the onset of cold weather. In the spring and summer, cleaning out areas with deer mice and their nests should be done with the same precautions mentioned above. Materials should be wetted down with a bleach solution and handled in an open-air space, with gloves and a mask worn. Deer mice, _Peromyscus maniculatus_, are the reservoir hosts of the virus and shed it in feces, urine, and saliva. Sin Nombre virus infections can be serious, with a relatively high case fatality rate associated with hantavirus cardiopulmonary syndrome. Prompt medical attention is essential. An image of the deer mouse, _P. maniculatus_, can be seen at  . A map showing the location of Washington State in the northwest of the lower 48 USA states can be accessed at  . Skagit County can be seen on the map at . - Mod.TY A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  .] [", "AVIAN INFLUENZA (118): SOUTH KOREA, WILD BIRDS, HPAI H5N8, OIE *************************************************************** A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Mon 26 Jun 2017 Source: OIE, WAHID (World Animal Health Information Database), weekly disease information 2017; 30(26) [edited] Highly pathogenic influenza A viruses (infection with) (non-poultry including wild birds), Korea (Rep. of) ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- Information received on 26 Jun 2017 from Dr Oh Soon-Min, Director -- Chief Veterinary Officer, General Animal Health Division, Ministry of Agriculture, Food and Rural Affairs (MAFRA), Sejong-Si, Korea (Rep. of) Summary Report type: immediate notification Date of start of the event: 24 Jan 2017 Date of confirmation of the event: 28 Jan 2017 Report date: 26 Jun 2016 Date submitted to OIE: 26 Jun 2016 Reason for notification: reoccurrence of a listed disease Date of previous occurrence: Apr 2016 Manifestation of disease: clinical disease Causal agent: Highly pathogenic influenza A virus Serotype: H5N8 Nature of diagnosis: laboratory (advanced) This event pertains to the whole country New outbreaks (9) Outbreak 1: Seosan-si, Yangdae-dong, Chungcheongnam-Do Date of start of the outbreak: 24 Jan 2017 Outbreak status: resolved on 24 Jan 2017 Epidemiological unit: Other Affected animals: Species / Susceptible / Cases / Deaths / Killed and disposed of / Slaughtered Mallard:_Anas platyrhynchos_(Anatidae) / - / 4 / - / - / 0 Outbreak 2: Jeonju-si, Songcheon-dong, Jeollabuk-Do Date of start of the outbreak: 27 Jan 2017 Outbreak status: resolved on 27 Jan 2017 Epidemiological unit: Other Affected animals: Species / Susceptible / Cases / Deaths / Killed and disposed of / Slaughtered Grey Heron:_Ardea cinerea_(Ardeidae)/ - / 1/ 1 / - / 0 Outbreak 3: Hongseong-gun, Seobu-myeon, Chungcheongnam-Do Date of start of the outbreak: 1 Feb 2017 Outbreak status: resolved on 1 Feb 2017 Epidemiological unit: Other Affected animals: Species / Susceptible / Cases / Deaths / Killed and disposed of / Slaughtered Mallard:_Anas platyrhynchos_(Anatidae) / - / 1 / - / - / 0 Outbreak 4: Gochang-gun, Seongnae-myeon, Jeollabuk-Do Date of start of the outbreak: 4 Feb 2017 Outbreak status: resolved on 4 Feb 2017 Epidemiological unit: Other Affected animals: Species / Susceptible / Cases / Deaths / Killed and disposed of / Slaughtered Greater White-fronted Goose:_Anser albifrons_(Anatidae)/ - / 1/ - / - / 0 Outbreak 5: Jeonju-si, Deokjin-gu, Jeollabuk-Do Date of start of the outbreak: 7 Feb 2017 Outbreak status: resolved on 7 Feb 2017 Epidemiological unit: Other Affected animals: Species / Susceptible / Cases / Deaths / Killed and disposed of / Slaughtered Grey Heron:_Ardea cinerea_(Ardeidae)/ - / 1/ 1 / - / 0 Outbreak 6: Jeonju-si, Deokjin-gu, Jeollabuk-Do Date of start of the outbreak: 7 Feb 2017 Outbreak status: resolved on 7 Feb 2017 Epidemiological unit: Other Affected animals: Species / Susceptible / Cases / Deaths / Killed and disposed of / Slaughtered Grey Egret:_Ardea alba_(Ardeidae)/ - / 1/ 1 / - / 0 Outbreak 7: Sungchang-gun, Jeokseong-myeon, Jeollabuk-Do Date of start of the outbreak: 9 Feb 2017 Outbreak status: resolved on 9 Feb 2017 Epidemiological unit: Other Affected animals: Species / Susceptible / Cases / Deaths / Killed and disposed of / Slaughtered Falcated Duck:_Anas falcate_(Anatidae)/ - / 1/ 1 / - / 0 Outbreak 8: Gwangjin-gu, Jayang 2-dong, Seoul Metropolitan City Date of start of the outbreak: 15 Feb 2017 Outbreak status: resolved on 15 Feb 2017 Epidemiological unit: Other Affected animals: Species / Susceptible / Cases / Deaths / Killed and disposed of / Slaughtered Greater White-fronted Goose:_Anser albifrons_(Anatidae)/ - / 1/ 1 / - / 0 Outbreak 9: Gangbuk-gu, Suyu-dong, Seoul Metropolitan City Date of start of the outbreak: 24 Feb 2017 Outbreak status: resolved on 24 Feb 2017 Epidemiological unit: Other Affected animals: Species / Susceptible / Cases / Deaths / Killed and disposed of / Slaughtered Greater White-fronted Goose:_Anser albifrons_(Anatidae)/ - / 1/ 1 / - / 0 Summary of outbreaks Total outbreaks: 9 Total animals affected: Species / Susceptible / Cases / Deaths / Killed and disposed of / Slaughtered Mallard:_Anas platyrhynchos_(Anatidae) / - / 5 / - / - / 0 Grey Heron:_Ardea cinerea_(Ardeidae) / - / 2 / 2 / - / 0 Greater White-fronted Goose:_Anser albifrons_(Anatidae) / - / 3 / 2 / - / 0 Great Egret:_Ardea alba_(Ardeidae) / - / 1 / 1 / - / 0 Falcated Duck:_Anas falcate_(Anatidae) / - / 1 / 1 / - / 0 Epidemiology Source of the outbreak(s) or origin of infection: animals in transit. Control measures Measures applied: movement control inside the country, surveillance outside containment and/or protection zone, surveillance within containment and/or protection zone, screening, traceability, official destruction of animal products, official disposal of carcasses, by-products and waste, stamping out, control of wildlife reservoirs, disinfection, vaccination prohibited, no treatment of affected animals Measures to be applied: no other measures Diagnostic test results Laboratory name and type: QIA (National laboratory) Species / Test / Test date / Result Falcated Duck / virus isolation/ 14 Feb 2017 / Positive Great Egret / virus isolation/ 11 Feb 2017 / Positive Greater White-fronted Goose/ virus isolation/ 7 Feb 2017 / Positive Grey Heron/ virus isolation/ 2 Feb 2017 / Positive Grey Heron/ virus isolation/ 11 Feb 2017 / Positive Grey Heron/ virus isolation/ 21 Feb 2017 / Positive Grey Heron/ virus isolation/ 27 Feb 2017 / Positive Mallard/ virus isolation/ 28 Jan 2017 / Positive Mallard/ virus isolation/ 7 Feb 2017 / Positive Future Reporting: The event is continuing. Weekly follow-up reports will be submitted [The location of the outbreaks can be seen on the interactive map included in the OIE report at the source URL above.] -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail [A map showing the outbreaks of HPAI reported in the region from 1 Jan 2016 to 27 Jun 2017 can be seen at (click on the section of interest on the map, and zoom in). See ProMED-mail posting http://promedmail.org/post/20170624.5127394, where a relevant commentary is available. - Mod.CRD A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  .] [", "AFRICAN SWINE FEVER - EUROPE (11): CZECH REPUBLIC (ZLIN) WILD BOAR, FIRST REPORT, OIE ************************************************************************************* A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Tue 27 Jun 2017 Source: OIE, WAHID (World Animal Health Information Database), weekly disease information 2017; 30(26) [edited] African swine fever (ASF), Czech Republic ----------------------------------------- Information received on 27 Jun 2017 from Dr Zbynek Semerad, Director General, State Veterinary Administration, Veterinary Administration, Prague, Czech Republic Summary Report type: immediate notification Date of start of the event: 21 Jun 2017 Date of confirmation of the event: 27 Jun 2017 Reason for notification: 1st occurrence of a listed disease Causal agent: African swine fever virus Nature of diagnosis: laboratory (basic) This event pertains to a defined zone within the country. New outbreaks (1) Summary of outbreaks Total outbreaks: 1 Outbreak 1: Zelechovine, Zlin, Zlinsky [Zlin Region] Date of start of the outbreak: 21 Jun 2017 Outbreak status: continuing (or date resolved not provided) Epidemiological unit: forest Total animals affected: Species / Susceptible / Cases / Deaths / Destroyed / Slaughtered Wild boar:_Sus scrofa_(Suidae) / - / 1 / 1 / 0 / 0 Affected population: Samples for African swine fever (ASF) testing were collected from a wild boar found dead and sent to the National Veterinary Research Institute (Reference Laboratory) within the framework of the national ASF surveillance programme. Epidemiology Source of the outbreak(s) or origin of infection: Unknown or inconclusive Control measures Measures applied: movement control inside the country, surveillance within containment and/or protection zone, vaccination permitted (if a vaccine exists), no treatment of affected animals. Measures to be applied: no other measures Diagnostic test results Laboratory name and type: / Species / Test / Test date / Result State Veterinary Institute, Jihlava (National laboratory)/ Wild boar/ reverse transcription - polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR)/ 27 Jun 2017 / Positive Future reporting The event is continuing. Weekly reports will be submitted. [The location of the outbreak can be seen on the interactive map included in the OIE report at the source URL above.] -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail [According to a media report, \"the disease was found in 2 dead wild boars that may have crossed the border into the Zlin region of the country. Representatives of Czech State Veterinary Administration (SVS) have been inspecting 2 farms near Zlin that keep 5000 pigs. If domesticated pigs catch the disease, they have to be put down. A 10-km [6.21 miles] zone around Zlin has been cordoned off. In the zone, wild boars must not be hunted or fed, and hunters must actively seek and report dead wild boar. Breeders must report all the pigs on the farm and manage them to avoid them getting in touch with feral pigs.\" The following is an abstract from the European Food Safety Authority (EFSA) on the epidemiological analyses of African swine fever in the Baltic countries and Poland, published on 23 March 2017 and available at Abstract: -------------- \"African swine fever virus (ASFV) has been notified in the Baltic countries and the eastern part of Poland from the beginning of 2014 up to now. In collaboration with the ASF-affected Member States (MS), EFSA is updating the epidemiological analysis of ASF in the European Union which was carried out in 2015. For this purpose, the latest epidemiological and laboratory data were analyzed in order to identify the spatial-temporal pattern of the epidemic and a risk factors facilitating its spread. Currently, the ASF outbreaks in wild boar in the Baltic countries and Poland can be defined as a small-scale epidemic with a slow average spatial spread in wild boar subpopulations (approximately from 1 in Lithuania and Poland to 2 km/month in Estonia and Latvia). The number of positive samples in hunted wild boar peaks in winter which can be explained by human activity patterns (significant hunting activity over winter). The number of positive samples in wild boar found dead peaks in summer. This could be related to the epidemiology of the disease and/or the biology of wild boar; however, this needs further investigation. Virus prevalence in hunted wild boar is very low (0.04-3 percent), without any apparent trend over time. Apparent virus prevalence at country level in wild boar found dead in affected countries ranges from 60 percent to 86 percent, with the exception of Poland, where values between 0.5 percent and 1.42 percent, were observed. Since the beginning of the epidemic, the apparent antibody prevalence in hunted wild boar has always been lower than the apparent virus prevalence, indicating an unchanged epidemiological/immunological situation. The risk factor analysis shows an association between the number of settlements, human and domestic pigs population size or wild boar population density and the presence of ASF in wild boar for Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania\". References ---------- 1. EFSA (European Food Safety Authority), Corti\u00f1as Abrahantes J, Gogin A, Richardson J and Gervelmeyer A, 2017. Scientific report on epidemiological analyses on African swine fever in the Baltic countries and Poland. EFSA Journal 2017;15(3):4732, 73 pp. doi: 10.2903/j.efsa.2017.4732 A map showing the outbreaks of African swine fever (ASF) reported in the region from 1 Jan 2015 to 27 Jun 2017 can be seen at  (click on the section of interest on the map, and zoom in). - Mod.CRD A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  .] [", "HEPATITIS E - NIGERIA (BORNO) ***************************** A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Tue 27 Jun 2017 Source: Outbreak News Today [edited] A hepatitis E outbreak has been reported in the north-east Borno State, according to the Nigeria Federal Ministry of Health. As of 17 Jun 2017, a total of 53 suspected hepatitis E cases with no fatality have been reported from Damasak and Ngala Local Government Areas (LGA). At least 3 pregnant women were among these cases. Four out of 9 biological samples obtained from the initial cases tested positive for hepatitis E virus at a virology laboratory in Lagos, thus confirming the outbreak. The current hepatitis E outbreak in the north-east Borno State of Nigeria is taking place within the context of the ongoing humanitarian crisis in the northern part of the country. The outbreak is occurring in the aftermath of increasing population movements within the Lake Chad basin, following the gradually improving security situation. The Diffa region in Niger and the Salamat region in Chad have ongoing outbreaks of hepatitis E. -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail [Much of the mortality in hepatitis E occurs in women in the 2nd and 3rd trimesters of pregnancy. The following regarding hepatitis E virus infection during pregnancy is extracted from: Chaudhry SA, Verma N and Koren G: Hepatitis E infection during pregnancy. Can Fam Physician. 2015; 6(7)1: 607-608;  . \"Hepatitis E infection during pregnancy and in the 3rd trimester, especially with genotype 1, is associated with more severe infection and might lead to fulminant hepatic failure and maternal death (11-13). Although the mechanism of liver injury is not yet clear, it is possible that interplay of hormonal and immunologic changes during pregnancy, along with a high viral load of HEV, renders the woman more vulnerable (14). Immunologic changes during pregnancy promote the maintenance of the fetus in the maternal environment by suppression of T cell-mediated immunity, rendering pregnant women more susceptible to viral infections like HEV infection. During pregnancy, levels of progesterone, estrogen, and human chorionic gonadotropin increase as pregnancy advances. These hormones play a considerable role in altering immune regulation and increasing viral replications (15). \"Hepatitis E infection with genotype 1 during the 3rd trimester can lead to maternal mortality in up to 15 percent to 25 percent of cases (16). Most of the studies showing high maternal mortality are from India, where infection occurs in epidemics. There is a very high risk of vertical transmission of HEV from the mother to the fetus. During a Delhi epidemic, a hospital-based study revealed that HEV infection during pregnancy was associated with miscarriage, stillbirth, or neonatal death in 56 percent of infants (6). One recent study highlights that HEV infection might be responsible for 2400 to 3000 stillbirths each year in developing countries, with many additional fetal deaths linked to antenatal maternal deaths (11). There is a very high risk of preterm delivery in pregnant women with HEV infection, with poor neonatal survival rates (11,17). In 2 separate studies from India, 15 percent to 50 percent of live-born infants of mothers with HEV infection died within 1 week of birth (11,18). During an outbreak in Sudan in 2010 to 2011, among 39 pregnant women with HEV infection there were 14 intrauterine deaths and 9 premature deliveries (19).\" References ---------- 6. Naidu SS and Viswanathan R. Infectious hepatitis in pregnancy during Delhi epidemic. Indian J Med Res. 1957; 45(Suppl): 71-76. 11. Patra S, Kumar A, Trivedi SS, Puri M and Sarin SK. Maternal and fetal outcomes in pregnant women with acute hepatitis E virus infection. Ann Intern Med. 2007; 147(1): 28-33; abstract available at  . 12. Teo CG. Fatal outbreaks of jaundice in pregnancy and the epidemic history of hepatitis E. Epidemiol Infect. 2012; 140(5): 767-87; abstract available at . 13. Devi SG, Kumar A, Kar P, Husain SA and Sharma S. Association of pregnancy outcome with cytokine gene polymorphisms in HEV infection during pregnancy. J Med Virol. 2014; 86(8): 1366-76; abstract available at  . 14. Fiore S and Savasi V. Treatment of viral hepatitis in pregnancy. Expert Opin Pharmacother. 2009; 10(17): 2801-2809; abstract available at . 15. Navaneethan U, Al Mohajer M and Shata MT. Hepatitis E and pregnancy: understanding the pathogenesis. Liver Int. 2008; 28(9): 1190-9; available at  . 16. Ranger-Rogez S, Alain S and Denis F. Hepatitis viruses: mother to child transmission [in French]. Pathol Biol (Paris) 2002; 50(9): 568-75; abstract available at  . 17. Krain LJ, Atwell JE, Nelson KE and Labrique AB. Fetal and neonatal health consequences of vertically transmitted hepatitis E virus infection. Am J Trop Med Hyg. 2014; 90(2): 365-70; available at  . 18. Rasheeda CA, Navaneethan U, Jayanthi V. Liver disease in pregnancy and its influence on maternal and fetal mortality: a prospective study from Chennai, Southern India. Eur J Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2008; 20(4): 362-4. 19. Rayis DA, Jumaa AM, Gasim GI, Karsany MS and Adam I. An outbreak of hepatitis E and high maternal mortality at Port Sudan, Eastern Sudan. Pathog Glob Health. 2013; 107(2): 66-8;  . - Mod.LL A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  .] [", "MERS-COV (42): SAUDI ARABIA (RIYADH, ASH SHARQIYAH, AL MADINAH), WHO ******************************************************************** A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases In this update: [1] Saudi Arabia, 4 new cases, 4 new deaths - Saudi MOH 19-27 Jun 2017 [2] Saudi Arabia - WHO update 19 Jun 2017 11-15 Jun 2017 ****** [1] Saudi Arabia, 4 new cases, 4 new deaths - Saudi MOH 19-27 Jun 2017 Date: Tue 27 Jun 2017 Source: Saudi MOH 19-27 Jun 2017 [edited] As of today [Tue 27 Jun 2017], there have been a total of: 1671 laboratory-confirmed cases of MERS-CoV infection, including 677 deaths [reported case fatality rate 40.5 percent], 968 recoveries, and 26 currently active cases/infections. [As previously mentioned, the numbers of deaths, recoveries and currently active cases come from my spreadsheet tallies and differ from those listed on the Saudi MOH website; my spreadsheet counts asymptomatic infections. Of note is that there were no reports available during the period 19-26 Jun 2017, with delayed reporting available on 26 Jun 2017. The delayed reports include information for all dates except 24 and 26 Jun 2017. For the purposes of this current update I am treating 24 and 26 Jun 2017 as days with 0 newly confirmed cases, 0 newly reported deaths and 0 newly reported recoveries. - Mod.MPP] Since the last ProMED-mail update [Published 20 Jun 2017, but covering the period 16-18 Jun 2017], there have been a total of: 4 newly confirmed cases/infections 4 newly reported fatalities, and 14 newly reported recoveries. Information on newly confirmed cases (4 cases) Date: Sun 25 Jun 2017 (1 case) 1 - A 30-year-old Saudi female, non-healthcare worker from Dammam [Ash Sharqiyah region] currently in critical condition. Classified as a primary case with a history of indirect contact with camels in the 14 days preceding onset of illness. Date: Fri 23 Jun 2017 (1 case) 2 - A 70-year-old Saudi male, non-healthcare worker from Riyadh [Riyadh region], currently in critical condition. Pending classification as still under investigation (although no history of contact with camels in the 14 days preceding onset of illness). Date: Thu 22 Jun 2017 (1 case) 3 - An 85-year-old Saudi male, non-healthcare worker from Yanbua [Al Madinah region], reported to have died at the time of initial confirmation report [see fatality no. 3 below]. Classified as a primary case with no history of contact with camels in the 14 days preceding onset of illness. Date: Mon 19 Jun 2017 (1 case) 4 - A 42-year-old expat male, non-healthcare worker, from Riyadh [Riyadh region] noted to be in stable condition, having been identified as an asymptomatic household contact of a MERS-CoV infected individual. Classified as a secondary case in a household contact. Information on newly confirmed fatalities (4 fatalities) Date: Sun 25 Jun 2017 (1 fatality) 1- A 79-year-old Saudi male, non-healthcare worker from Riyadh [Riyadh region], with a history of pre-existing co-morbidities. [Reported as a newly confirmed case on 15 Jun 2017 at which time he was noted to be in stable condition. Classified as a secondary healthcare acquired case in a patient. - Mod.MPP] Date: Fri 23 Jun 2017 (1 fatality) 2- A 47-year-old expat male from Riyadh [Riyadh region], with no a history of pre-existing co-morbidities. [Reported as a newly confirmed case on 1 Jun 2017 at which time he was noted to be in critical condition. Classified as a primary case with high risk exposure history in the 14 days preceding onset of illness still under investigation. - Mod.MPP] Date: Thu 22 Jun 2017 (1 case) 4- A 51-year-old Saudi male, non-healthcare worker from Jeddah [Makkah region] with a history of pre-existing co-morbidities. [Reported as a newly confirmed case on 2 Jun 2017, at which time he was noted to be in stable condition. Classified as a secondary healthcare acquired case in a hospital visitor. - Mod.MPP] Information on newly confirmed recoveries (14 recoveries)  - 11 of the 14 were associated with the ongoing nosocomial outbreak in Riyadh.  - 9 of the 11 were healthcare workers, 2 were in patients  - 8 were asymptomatic contacts identified through contact tracing activities Recoveries amongst individuals involved in nosocomial transmission:  - all from Riyadh in Riyadh region  - all classified as secondary healthcare acquired cases 25 Jun 2017 (4 recoveries) 1- A 42-year-old expat female healthcare worker, noted to be in stable condition. [reported as a newly confirmed case on either 7 or 11 Jun 2017] 2- A 57-year-old Saudi female, non-healthcare worker - patient, asymptomatic contact [reported as a newly confirmed infection on 7 Jun 2017] 3- A 30-year-old expat female healthcare worker, asymptomatic contact [reported as newly confirmed infection on 2 Jun 2017] 4- A 33-year-old expat female healthcare worker, asymptomatic contact [reported as newly confirmed infection on 2 Jun 2017] 23 Jun 2017 (1 recovery) 5- A 53-year-old expat female healthcare worker, noted to be in stable condition. [reported as a newly confirmed case on 13 Jun 2017] 22 Jun 2017 (1 recovery) 6- A 42-year-old expat female healthcare worker, noted to be in stable condition. [reported as a newly confirmed case on either 7 or 11 Jun 2017.] 21 Jun 2017 (2 recoveries) 7- A 41-year-old expat female healthcare worker, asymptomatic contact [reported as a newly confirmed infection on 17 Jun 2017] 8- A 48-year-old expat male, non-healthcare worker - patient, asymptomatic contact [reported as a newly confirmed infection on 8 Jun 2017] 20 Jun 2017 (1 recovery) 9- A 39-year-old expat male healthcare worker, asymptomatic contact [reported as a newly confirmed infection on 7 Jun 2017] 19 Jun 2017 (2 recoveries) 10- A 27-year-old expat female healthcare worker, asymptomatic contact [reported as a newly confirmed infection on 9 Jun 2017] 11- A 28-year-old expat female healthcare worker, asymptomatic contact [reported as a newly confirmed infection on 9 Jun 2017] Recoveries not associated with known nosocomial transmission in Riyadh (3 recoveries) 25 Jun 2017 12- A 73-year-old Saudi male, non-healthcare worker from Madinah [Al Madinah region]. [reported as newly confirmed case on 4 Jun 2017 at which time noted to be in stable condition. Classified as a primary case with a history of direct contact with camels. - Mod.MPP] 22 Jun 2017 13- A 22-year-old Saudi male, non-healthcare worker from Thadig [Riyadh region]. [unable to find information on this individual as a newly confirmed case neither on MOH website nor in WHO updates to date. - Mod.MPP] 20 Jun 2017 14- A 52-year-old Saudi male, non-healthcare worker from Jeddah [Makkah region]. [reported as a newly confirmed case on 25 May 2017 at which time he was noted to be in critical condition. Classifed as a secondary healthcare acquired case in a patient. - Mod.MPP] -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail [In the 9 day interval since the last update, there have been a total of 4 newly confirmed cases of MERS-CoV infection reported from Saudi Arabia, none of whom are reported to be associated with the nosocomial transmission chains that were ongoing in Riyadh. 2 of the 4 newly confirmed cases were from Riyadh, one of whom was identified as an asymptomatic household contact of a previously confirmed case. The other 2 cases came from Yanbua in Al Madinah Region and Damman in Ash Sharq\u012byah [Eastern Region]. There were 4 newly reported fatalities in this period, and most notable were the 14 reported recoveries during this period, 9 of whom were associated with the nosocomial outbreaks ongoing in Riyadh. Maps showing the locations of the cases can be found at the source URLs. - Mod.MPP] ****** [2] Saudi Arabia - WHO update 19 Jun 2017 11-15 Jun 2017 Date: Mon 19 Jun 2017 Source: WHO Emergencies preparedness, response Middle East respiratory syndrome coronavirus (MERS-CoV) - Saudi Arabia 19 Jun 2017 ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------- Between [11 and 15 Jun 2017], the national IHR Focal Point of Saudi Arabia reported 14 additional cases of Middle East Respiratory Syndrome Coronavirus (MERS-CoV) infection including one fatal case among previously reported cases. Details of the cases A total of 13 of the 14 newly reported cases are associated with clusters 1 and 3 in the Disease Outbreak News published on 13 Jun 2017. Seven of the 13 newly reported cases are health care workers. Cluster 1 This Middle East Respiratory Syndrome (MERS) cluster is currently occurring in a hospital, Riyadh city, Riyadh region. An additional 9 cases have been reported in this cluster including 3 health care workers. In total, 32 laboratory-confirmed cases reported to WHO are associated with this cluster to date. All of the asymptomatic cases are in home isolation and all symptomatic cases are isolated on a hospital ward. Cluster 2 No newly reported cases are associated with cluster 2 as reported in the Disease Outbreak News published on 13 Jun 2017. Cluster 3 This MERS cluster is currently occurring in a 3rd hospital in Riyadh city, Riyadh Region. In addition to the cases previously reported in the Disease Outbreak News published on 13 Jun 2017, the cluster involves 4 newly reported cases. To date, this cluster involves, including the suspected index case, 8 laboratory confirmed patients all of them are health care workers, including the 4 newly reported cases described in the separate document (see below). Globally, 2029 laboratory-confirmed cases of infection with MERS-CoV including at least 704 related deaths have been reported to WHO. Public health response The Ministry of Health of Saudi Arabia is evaluating each case and their contacts and implementing measures to limit further human-to-human transmission and bring these outbreaks to a control. These measures include:  - Proper isolation for all confirmed cases (home isolation for asymptomatic patients, in hospital for symptomatic patients).  - Active tracing for all contacts of patients, health care workers and community contacts.  - Identification of high and low risk contacts with daily monitoring for all during incubation period of the 14 days and performing laboratory testing for high risk contacts, regardless of the development of symptoms; multiple laboratory testing is conducted during the follow-up period.  - Regular updating of the line list of cases and contacts and conducting epidemiological analysis of data to identify the source of infection, links between patients and reasons for MERS-CoV spread in the hospitals.  - Investigation of suspected cases between patients and health care workers based on case definition of MERS.  - Enforcement of strict adherence to proper environmental cleaning, disinfection and terminal cleaning and disinfection for hospital environment with special care to the departments where the outbreaks are currently occurring or have occurred.  - Enforcement of visual triage for respiratory diseases in emergency department and outpatient departments and ensure the 24/7 availability of a trained nurse for early detection of patient with respiratory symptoms, and proper documentation in triage form.  - Extensive training of all health care workers on case definition for early detection, implementation of isolation precautions, proper selection, donning and doffing of PPEs, hand hygiene and environmental cleaning and disinfection.  - Ensuring that all health care workers tested for N95 fitting (fit test).  - Ensuring availability of infection prevention supplies including hand sanitizer, PPEs, surface disinfectants, portable HEPA filters and fumigation machines.  - Enforcing the implementing of a policy of not allowing health care workers to travel without medical clearance to prevent the spread of the virus to other countries. WHO risk assessment MERS-CoV causes severe human infections resulting in high mortality and has demonstrated the ability to transmit between humans. So far, the observed non-sustained human-to-human transmission has occurred mainly in health care settings. Preliminary investigations of the clusters described above indicate that secondary cases are linked to 2 events where aerosolizing procedures were conducted in crowded medical wards under sub-optimal infection prevention and control conditions. The notification of additional cases does not change the overall risk assessment. WHO expects that additional cases of MERS-CoV infection will be reported from the Middle East, and that cases will continue to be exported to other countries by individuals who might acquire the infection after exposure to animals or animal products (for example, following contact with dromedaries) or human source (for example, in a health care setting). WHO continues to monitor the epidemiological situation and conducts risk assessment based on the latest available information. WHO advice Based on the current situation and available information, WHO encourages all Member States to continue their surveillance for acute respiratory infections and to carefully review any unusual patterns. Infection prevention and control measures are critical to prevent the possible spread of MERS-CoV in health care facilities. It is not always possible to identify patients with MERS-CoV early because like other respiratory infections, the early symptoms of MERS-CoV are non-specific. Therefore, health-care workers should always apply standard precautions consistently with all patients, regardless of their diagnosis. Droplet precautions should be added to the standard precautions when providing care to patients with symptoms of acute respiratory infection; contact precautions and eye protection should be added when caring for probable or confirmed cases of MERS-CoV infection; airborne precautions should be applied when performing aerosol generating procedures. Until more is understood about MERS-CoV, people with diabetes, renal failure, chronic lung disease, and immunocompromised persons are considered to be at high risk of severe disease from MERS-CoV infection. Therefore, these people should avoid close contact with animals, particularly camels, when visiting farms, markets, or barn areas where the virus is known to be potentially circulating. General hygiene measures, such as regular hand washing before and after touching animals and avoiding contact with sick animals, should be adhered to. Food hygiene practices should be observed. People should avoid drinking raw camel milk or camel urine, or eating meat that has not been properly cooked. WHO does not advise special screening at points of entry with regard to this event nor does it currently recommend the application of any travel or trade restrictions. Line listing of newly confirmed cases from 11-15 Jun 2017 Case no. / Date report WHO / City of residence / Age / Sex / HCW / Co-morbidities / Camel exposure / Camel milk / Exposure to other cases / Date of onset of symptoms / Date of hospitalization / Date of lab confirmation / Status / Date of outcome 1 / 2017-06-11 / Riyadh / 35 / M / Yes / No / No / No / Yes\u2020 / NA / NA / 2017-06-10 / Alive 2 / 2017-06-11 / Riyadh / 57 / M / Yes / Yes / No / No / Yes\u2020 / 2017-06-07 / 2017-06-08 / 2017-06-10 / Alive 3 / 2017-06-11 / Riyadh / 42 / F / Yes / No / No / No / Yes\u2020 / 2017-06-08 / 2017-06-09 / 2017-06-10 / Alive 4 / 2017-06-11 / Riyadh / 54 / F / Yes / No / No / No / Yes\u2020 / NA / NA / 2017-06-10 / Alive 5 / 2017-06-11 / Riyadh / 39 / M / Yes / No / No / No / Yes\u2020 / NA / NA / 2017-06-10 / Alive 6 / 2017-06-12 / Riyadh / 45 / F / Yes / No / No / No / Yes\u2020 / NA / NA / 2017-06-11 / Alive 7 / 2017-06-13 / Riyadh / 58 / M / No / Yes / No / No / Yes\u2020 / 2017-06-12 / 2017-05-27* / 2017-06-13 / Alive 8 / 2017-06-13 / Riyadh / 53 / F / Yes / No / No / No / Yes\u2020 / 2017-06-11 / 2017-06-12 / 2017-06-13 / Alive 9 / 2017-06-14 / Riyadh / 70 / F / No / Yes / No / No / Yes\u2020 / 2017-06-10 / NA / 2017-06-14 / Alive 10 / 2017-06-14 / Riyadh / 59 / M / No / Yes / No / No / Yes\u2020 / 2017-06-12 / 2017-05-27* / 2017-06-14 / Alive 11 / 2017-06-14 / Riyadh / 47 / M / No / Yes / NA / NA / NA / 2017-06-06 / 2017-06-11 / 2017-06-13 / Alive 12 / 2017-06-15 / Hail City / 29 / M / No / Yes / No / No / Yes\u2020 / 2017-06-12 / 2017-06-14 / 2017-06-15 / Alive 13 / 2017-06-15 / Riyadh / 79 / M / No / Yes / No / No / Yes\u2020 / 2017-06-13 / 2017-06-01* / 2017-06-15 / Alive 14 / 2017-06-15 / Riyadh / 67 / M / No / Yes / No / No / Yes\u2020 / 2017-06-13 / 2017-05-28* / 2017-06-15 / Alive \u2020Case was detected through contact tracing of a previous MERS-CoV case. -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail Rapporteur Marianne Hopp [According to the WHO update, there have now been 2029 laboratory confirmed cases of MERS-CoV infection reported globally including at least 704 related deaths reported to WHO. In summary there are 3 concurrent nocomial outbreaks ongoing in Riyadh involving 3 hospitals in Riyadh. The 1st outbreak/cluster has identified 32 laboratory confirmed cases of whom 9 were identified in the above update. The 2nd outbreak/cluster has not reported new cases in the above update, and the 3rd outbreak/cluster there are 8 laboratory confirmed cases, all of whom are healthcare workers (4 of whom were newly reported in the above update). Of note in this update is the mention that the nosocomial outbreaks relate to 2 separate events with aerosolizing procedures - a reminder of some of the nosocomial associated super spreader events during the SARS outbreak in 2002-2003. Additional updated information on cases identified in the above provided line listing is that cases nos. Twelve and 13 were reported to have died - case no.12 on 17 Jun 2017 and case no. Up to 13 on 25 Jun 2017. Cases nos. 9, 10, and 14 were noted to be in critical condition at the time of their initial confirmation reports. Case no.11 is reported in the above report as a 47-year-old, whereas the initial confirmation report on the Saudi MOH website mentions the case is 40-years-old. Cases no. 1, 3, and 8 were reported to have recovered, case no.1 on 17 Jun 2017, case 3 either 22 or 25 Jun Jun 2017 (there were 2 42-year-old female healthcare workers), and case 8 on 23 Jun 2017. And case no.12 is most likely the 29-year-old male reported from Riyadh on the MOH report, whereas the above report has him from Hail in Hail Region. The HealthMap/ProMED map of Saudi Arabia can be found at:  . - Mod.MPP A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  .] [", "MELIOIDOSIS - BELGIUM: ex SOUTHEAST ASIA **************************************** A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Wed 28 Jun 2017 From: Caroline Theunissen [edited] On [Fri 16 Jun 2017], a 71-year old male patient presented at the University Hospital of Antwerp (UZA), Belgium, with an eight weeks history of spiking fever (up to 42 C [107.6 F]), dyspnea, tachypnea, cough, swelling of the right knee, severe swelling and pain of the left wrist, chest and back pain. Medical history included inguinal hernia repair, laparoscopic resection of the rectum and sigmoid for a pT3N0 colon cancer (September 2014), arthroscopy of the right knee (October 2014) and bilateral cataract surgery (July 2016). The man was born in Belgium but had been living in Pattaya, Thailand for over 10 years and had travelled to Cambodia twice in the past year [2016]. In April 2016 he visited Phnom Penh and Ankor Wat (Siem Reap) for 9 days, during which he developed diarrhea and fever. He was diagnosed with acute gastroenteritis in a Bangkok hospital and was sent home. Despite a course of antibacterials, fever persisted and the patient was readmitted. Amoebic liver abscess was diagnosed and treated with surgical drainage. In May 2017, the high grade fever recurred after a 9 - day trip to Phnom Penh and the patient returned to Belgium for further medical care. He was 1st admitted in the regional hospital of Geel before being referred the same day to the department of Tropical Medicine at the UZA. Upon admission his temperature was 38.8 C [101.8 F], oxygen saturation 88 percent and respiratory rate 40 per minute. Blood pressure was 160/87 mmHg and pulse was 90 beats per minute. Clinical examination revealed audible crepitation on the right lung basis and a subcutaneous abscess on the right knee. Laboratory tests revealed leucocytosis of 19000/microL and a C-Reactive Protein (CRP) level of 289 mg/dL. A CT-scan of the chest and abdomen revealed multiple abscesses in lung and liver. IV ceftazidime was started for a presumptive clinical diagnosis of melioidosis. The solitary liver abscess of 8.3 cm [3.26 inches] diameter was drained percutaneously, as well as the cutaneous abscess on the patient's knee. Within 24 hours, cultures of blood, liver abscess and skin became positive for Gram-negative rods and ceftazidime was switched into IV meropenem for optimal Gram-negative coverage. The isolates were subsequently identified as _Burkholderia pseudomallei_. On the 3rd day of hospitalization, trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole was added because of limited clinical improvement. During the following days, the patient improved clinically and CRP and leucocytosis declined. On day 8 of hospitalization, the patient developed visual hallucinations and intermittent confusion. A brain MRI revealed abscesses in the left parietal and occipital cortex which were drained subsequently. Melioidosis is an infection caused by _Burkholderia pseudomallei_, a facultative intracellular Gram-negative bacterium, present in soil and fresh water. The disease is endemic in large parts of the world, especially in South and South-East Asia and tropical Australia. Its incidence is estimated around 165 000 cases per year, of which more than 50 percent are fatal. Infection occurs after exposure to environmental sources such as contaminated soil or fresh water (i.e. dust, paddy field, flooding during the rainy season) and presents particularly in patients with comorbidities such as diabetes mellitus, chronic lung, liver or kidney disease and alcoholism. Although our patient is not known with any of these specific conditions, we presume a decreased immunity because of his older age and history of colon cancer. The clinical presentation of melioidosis varies by age and geographic region. In children the most common presentation includes localized skin infection, with lower fatality rates. In adults, clinical manifestations include pneumonia, bacteremia, (deep) abscesses of the skin, muscles, and organs such as liver, brain, spleen and lungs; arthritis, spondylodiscitis and encephalitis. Infection can be latent, with subsequent reactivation, as in tuberculosis. Probably, the \"amoebic\" abscess of our patient one year earlier was a 1st episode, partially treated by surgical drainage. Differential diagnosis depends on the initial presentation but is generally wide, including community acquired pneumonia, Gram negative blood stream infection, tuberculosis, pyogenic abscesses, etc. _B. pseudomallei_ is inherently resistant to ampicillin, ceftriaxone, fluoroquinolones and aminoglycosides, thus compromising the adequacy of most empiric antibacterial treatments. Beside surgical drainage of abscesses, the optimal treatment regimen consists of an initial intensive phase with ceftazidime or meropenem with or without cotrimoxazole, during 2-8 weeks, followed by a maintenance phase with cotrimoxazole during 3 to 6 months. There is a significant risk for infection relapse, especially when disease is severe, or treatment incomplete. This case of melioidosis with a typical clinical presentation (blood stream infection with multiple organ and skin abscesses, pneumonia and arthritis) in a patient residing and travelling in an hyper endemic region, emphasizes the importance of its recognition as a potentially life threatening imported infection in returning travelers. -- Caroline Theunissen Leander Depuysseleyr Erika Vlieghe Department of Internal Medicine, Infectious Diseases and Tropical Medicine University Hospital Antwerp Department of Clinical Sciences Institute of Tropical Medicine Antwerp, Belgium [ProMED thanks Dr Theunissen and colleagues for this 1st hand contribution. Melioidosis is a disease of the rainy season in its endemic areas. It mainly affects people who have direct contact with soil and water. Many have an underlying predisposing condition such as diabetes (commonest risk factor), renal disease, cirrhosis, thalassemia, alcohol dependence, immunosuppressive therapy, chronic obstructive lung disease, cystic fibrosis, and excess kava consumption. Kava is an herbal member of the pepper family that can be associated with chronic liver disease. Melioidosis may present at any age, but peaks in the 4th and 5th decades of life, affecting men more than women. In addition, although severe fulminating infection can and does occur in healthy individuals, severe disease and fatalities are much less common in those without risk factors. The most commonly recognized presentation of melioidosis is pneumonia, associated with high fever, significant muscle aches, chest pain, and -- although the cough can be nonproductive -- respiratory secretions can be purulent, significant in quantity, and associated with on-and-off bright, red blood. The lung infection can be rapidly fatal -- with bacteremia and shock -- or somewhat more indolent. Acute melioidosis septicemia is the most severe complication of the infection. It presents as a typical sepsis syndrome with hypotension, high cardiac output, and low systemic vascular resistance. In many cases, a primary focus in the soft tissues or lung can be found. The syndrome, usually in patients with risk factor comorbidities, is characteristically associated with multiple abscesses involving the cutaneous tissues, the lung, the liver, and spleen, and a very high mortality rate of 80 to 95 percent. With prompt optimal therapy, the case fatality rate can be decreased to 40 to 50 percent. The melioidosis bacillus is intrinsically insensitive to many antimicrobials. It should be noted that bioterrorism strains may be engineered to be even more resistant. _Burkholderia pseudomallei_ is usually inhibited by tetracyclines, chloramphenicol, trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole (SXT), antipseudomonal penicillins, carbapenems, ceftazidime, and amoxicillin/clavulanate or ampicillin/sulbactam. Ceftriaxone and cefotaxime have good in vitro activity but poor efficacy; and cefepime did not appear, as well, to be equivalent to ceftazidime in a mouse model. The unusual antimicrobial profile of resistance to colistin and polymyxin B and the aminoglycosides but sensitivity to amoxicillin/clavulanate is a useful tool to consider in treatment of infection with the organism. The randomized and quasi-randomized trials comparing melioidosis treatment have been reviewed, and it was found that the formerly standard therapy of chloramphenicol, doxycycline, and SXT combination had a higher mortality rate than therapy with ceftazidime, imipenem/cilastatin, or amoxicillin/clavulanate (or ampicillin/sulbactam). The betalactam-betalactamase inhibitor therapy, however, seemed to have a higher failure rate. Source: Tolaney P, Lutwick LI: Melioidosis. In: Lutwick LI, Lutwick SM (eds). Bioterror: the weaponization of infectious diseases. Totowa NJ: Humana Press, 2008 pp 145-58. For the microbiologists among our readers, a new (and 5th) member of the _B. pseudomallei_ complex has been described, _B. humptydooensis_ , from the Northern Territory of Australia and named after the small town of Humpty Doo near to where the isolate was found (Tuanyok A, Mayo M, Scholz H, et al: _Burkholderia humptydooensis_ sp. nov., a new species related to _Burkholderia thailandensis_ and the fifth member of the _Burkholderia pseudomallei_ complex. App Environ Microbiol 2017; 83(5): e02802-16;  . - Mod.LL A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  .] [", "PORCINE REPROD. & RESP. SYNDROME - ISRAEL: (HAZAFON) FIRST REPORT, OIE *********************************************************************** A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Tue 27 Jun 2017 Source: OIE, WAHID (World Animal Health Information Database), weekly disease information 2017; 30(26) [edited] Porcine reproductive and respiratory syndrome, Israel ------------------------------------------------------------- Information received on [and dated] 27 Jun 2017 from Dr Nadav Galon, Director, Veterinary Services and Animal Health, Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development, BET DAGAN, Israel Summary Report type: immediate notification Date of start of the event: 5 Jun 2017 Date of confirmation of the event: 26 Jun 2017 Reason for notification: first occurrence of a listed disease in the country Causal agent: PRRS virus (Arterivirus) Genotype 2 (American) Nature of diagnosis: clinical, laboratory (advanced) This event pertains to a defined zone within the country. New outbreaks (1) Outbreak 1 (Ibilin): Ibilin, Acco, Hazafon Date of start of the outbreak: 5 Jun 2017 Outbreak status: continuing (or date resolved not provided) Epidemiological unit: farm Affected animals Species / Susceptible / Cases / Deaths / Killed and disposed of / Slaughtered Swine / 2673 / 800 / 603 / 0 / 0 Affected population: During the month of June until [Jun 27th], there were 1200 sows and 1473 piglets. Three sows died and it was estimated that 600 piglets out of 763 died from the disease, since normal mortality is estimated as 10-15 percent. Clinical symptoms included diarrhea, lethargy, coughing, fetus mummification, abortions and neonatal death. Outbreak 2 (Afeq): Afeq, Acco, Hazafon Date of start of the outbreak: 5 Jun 2017 Outbreak status: continuing (or date resolved not provided) Epidemiological unit: farm Affected animals Species / Susceptible / Cases / Deaths / Killed and disposed of / Slaughtered Swine / 5500 / 1500 / 1200 / 0 / 0 Affected population: Abortions, mortality of piglets and neonates, color alterations on the skin, mummification. This herd belongs to the same farmer of IBILIN. Summary of outbreaks: Total outbreaks: 2 Total animals affected: Species / Susceptible / Cases / Deaths / Destroyed / Slaughtered Swine / 8173 / 2300 / 1803 / 0 / 0 Outbreak statistics [rates apparent, expressed as percentages] Species / Morbidity rate / Mortality rate / Case fatality rate / Proportion susceptible animals lost* Swine / 28.14 / 22.06 / 78.39 / 22.06 *Removed from the susceptible population through death, destruction and/or slaughter Epidemiology Source of the outbreak(s) or origin of infection: unknown or inconclusive Epidemiological comments: The two farms belong to the same owner. Control measures Measures applied: movement control inside the country, quarantine, zoning, ante and post-mortem inspections, vaccination permitted (if a vaccine exists), treatment of affected animals (Supportive) Measures to be applied: no other measures Diagnostic test results Laboratory name and type / Species / Test / Test date / Result Experimental Zooprophylactic Institute, Brescia (Italy) (OIE Reference Laboratory)/ Swine / reverse transcription - polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) / 26 Jun 2017 / Positive Future reporting The event is continuing. Weekly follow-up reports will be submitted. [The location of the outbreaks can be seen on the interactive map included in the OIE report at the source URL above.] -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail [\"Porcine reproductive and respiratory syndrome (PRRS) is characterized by reproductive failure of sows and respiratory problems of piglets and growing pigs. The disease is caused by the PRRS virus (PRRSV), a virus currently classified as a member of the order _Nidovirales_, family _Arteriviridae_, genus _Arterivirus_. The primary target cells of the virus are differentiated macrophages of the pig, mainly alveolar but also present in other tissues. A total of 2 major antigenically different types of the virus exist: Type 1 (previously described as European - EU) and Type 2 (previously North American - NA). Historically, Type 1 was restricted to Europe and Type 2 to North America; currently they are spread globally. The virus is primarily transmitted via direct contact but also by contact with faeces, urine, semen and fomites. The possibility of insect vectors (houseflies and mosquitos) and aerogenic spread for short distances has also been confirmed. PRRS occurs in most major pig-producing areas throughout the world. The reproductive failure is characterized by infertility, late fetal mummification, abortions, stillbirths, and the birth of weak piglets that often die soon after birth from respiratory disease and secondary infections. Older pigs may demonstrate mild signs of respiratory disease, usually complicated by secondary infections. In 2006, a highly pathogenic PRRSV strain emerged in China (People's Rep. of) causing high fever (40-42\u00b0C) [104-107.6\u00b0F] in all age groups, abortions in sows and high mortality in sucking piglets, weaners and growers\". According to the most recent available annual report by Israel's State Veterinary officer for swine diseases, Dr P.S. Pozzi, during 2014-15 there were 24 operational pig-meat production farms. The number of breeding sows was about 14 500. The annual number of slaughtered pigs was about 190 000. - Mod.CRD/AS A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  .] [", "INFLUENZA, CANINE - USA (06): (GEORGIA) INCREASING INCIDENCE ************************************************************ A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Mon 26 Jun 2017, 4:14 PM EDT Source: WFXG [edited] Georgia veterinarians have recently confirmed an increase in the growth of canine respiratory disease in dogs. Although a typical day in the park can appear harmless, it can have fatal results if you're not careful. Augusta local Jack Hale says he typically tries to be careful when taking his dogs out to play. \"Here, this is only our 2nd time here at this dog [park]...usually, we take our own bowls but today I didn't think about it because this was kind of a last-minute thing.\" But taking that extra minute to remember and take precaution could pay off. Dr. Emily Garnto of Care More Animal Hospital says there has been widespread growth in the number of dogs suffering from canine respiratory disease or CIV: Canine Influenza Virus. \"There has been an increase in the number of dogs showing up positive in Macon. We have had in increase in the number of dogs showing respiratory signs such as coughing, sneezing, nasal discharge.\" It can even be transmitted in the air. Your dog could become infected if another simply barks nearby. \"It's honestly not just with contact. It can be transferred through the air. So barking, coughing, nasal secretions, contaminated bedding, environment in general,\" says Dr. Garnto. Even clinical symptoms like coughing, sneezing, and loss of appetite can appear mild. But if untreated, they can worsen. \"It can be fatal. That's just the important thing to know. It can lead to pneumonia. There is an increase in the number of dogs showing up positive, especially in the southeast. I would just push for recognition. That it is out there, your dog can get it. So go ahead and come in and get a vaccine.\" says Garnto. Just going the extra mile to clean bowls daily and making regular vet visits can help keep your dog virus free and tails wagging. If your dog is showing any symptoms of the virus, please make an appointment with your nearest veterinarian as soon as possible for the Canine Influenza Vaccine. [Byline: Princess Ruff] -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts [Macon is in the centre of Georgia; see:  . It is no longer just annual shots for distemper, rabies, and such, but now add canine influenza. This viral disease is now on the streets and if your dog meets a snuffling dog on your morning run, it could be in trouble, expensive trouble. So make sure your dog(s) is/are vaccinated and inform your neighbor ditto. - Mod.MHJ A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  .] [", "SEPSIS - VENEZUELA: (CARACAS) FATAL, PEDIATRIC HEMODIALYSIS UNIT **************************************************************** A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Mon 26 Jun 2017, 9:48 AM Source: El Universal [in Spanish, machine trans., edited] The NGO Prepara Familia, which supports mothers and patients of Children's Hospital J.M. of los R\u00edos, reported that on [Sun 25 Jun 2017] night, a two year old [boy] died in intensive care, the 4th child infected in the hemodialysis unit of this pediatric center. The first was a 10 year-old, who died on[3 May 2017] and was contaminated with _Klebsiella_ germ. In less than 8 days, a 12 [year-old] died and on [22 May 2017], a 16-year-old boy. Prepara Familia and Codevida emphasize that the hemodialysis unit, the osmosis plant and the tanks of the J.M hospital must undergo a rigorous disinfection process and demand compliance with the established protocols. At the end of April [2017], mothers of patients at the J.M. of los R\u00edos reported the contagion of 15 children from the Nephrology ward with infections such as _Klebsiella_, _Staphylococcus_ and _Pseudomonas_. It is presumed that the causes of the contagion are associated with poor water quality, since the 3 tanks of the hospital present fecal coliforms and aerobic mesophiles [?] in high values. Intermittent administration of antibiotics would have prevented the infection from subsiding. A total of 11 466 infants died in 2016, which represents 30.12 percent more deaths than in 2015, according to the epidemiological report by the Venezuelan Ministry of Health, after 3 years without official data. The highest number of deaths occurred in Zulia state (northwest), with 1409 cases; Carabobo (center), 928; Aragua (center), 888; Bolivar (southeast), 802, and Capital District (center), with 735 deaths. Among the most frequent causes of death are neonatal sepsis, pneumonia, hyaline membrane disease and premature birth. -- Communicated by: Kathryn Soderholm [Bacterial sepsis is a major complication of chronic hemodialysis and is due mainly to infections of the vascular access site. It occurs more commonly in patients with central venous catheters (CVC) than internal arteriovenous (AV) fistulas or AV grafts. CVC-related infections are associated with high morbidity, mortality, and costs. CVC infections include exit site infection, tunnel infection, and bacteremia; however, bacteremias are the most clinically important because of their common occurrence and potential for multi-organ failure and shock to develop. Most CVC infections are due to Gram-positive organisms, such as _Staphylococcus aureus_, especially methicillin-resistant _S. aureus_ (MRSA). Gram-negative bacterial species are isolated less commonly. Risk factors include poor patient hygiene, previous CVC infection, recent hospitalization, longer duration of catheter use, _S. aureus_ nasal carriage, and diabetes mellitus. Microorganisms adhere to the catheter and develop within a biofilm that forms on the catheter surfaces. Organisms can gain access to the bloodstream after colonizing the cutaneous vascular access site and migrating along either the tract exterior to the catheter or organisms are transferred by contact from the hands of individuals (usually health-care workers) while accessing the CVC, or from the patient's skin/surrounding clothing, to catheter hubs or caps, resulting in the contamination of luminal catheter surfaces. Another potential source for bacteremia, especially Gram-negative bacillary bacteremia, is microbial contamination of the dialysate, which the above article presumes is the cause of sepsis in a cluster of pediatric patients undergoing hemodialysis in Venezuela. The main water source for hemodialysis is the local drinking water supply to which electrolyte concentrate is added to form the dialysate. Gram-negative microbial contamination of the dialysate may release endotoxins that can cause transmembrane stimulation of circulating immune cells in the patient's blood to release proinflammatory cytokines that produce fever and other symptoms of sepsis. However, because of the pore diameter of the intact dialysis membrane, it is thought that passage of organisms across the dialyzer member from the contaminated dialysate to the bloodstream is unlikely to occur, as long as the dialysis membrane is undamaged (Suki WN, Massry SG. Therapy of Renal Diseases and Related Disorders, 3rd ed., page 1020  ). JM de los R\u00edos (or Jos\u00e9 Manuel de los R\u00edos Children's Hospital) is a pediatric public health center in the city of Caracas, the capital of Venezuela  . - Mod.ML A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  .] .................................................ml/ao/ml *##########################################################* ************************************************************ ProMED-mail makes every effort to verify the reports that are posted, but the accuracy and completeness of the information, and of any statements or opinions based thereon, are not guaranteed. The reader assumes all risks in using information posted or archived by ProMED-mail. ISID and its associated service providers shall not be held responsible for errors or omissions or held liable for any damages incurred as a result of use or reliance upon posted or archived material. ************************************************************ Donate to ProMED-mail. Details available at: ************************************************************ Visit ProMED-mail's web site at . Send all items for posting to: promed@promedmail.org (NOT to an individual moderator). If you do not give your full name name and affiliation, it may not be posted. You may unsub- scribe at . For assistance from a human being, send mail to:  . ############################################################ ############################################################ List-Unsubscribe: http://ww4.isid.org/promedmail/subscribe.php", "PANLEUKOPENIA VIRUS, FELINE - USA: (GEORGIA) CAT SHELTER ******************************************************** A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Mon 26 Jun 2017, 6:08 PM Source: WSBTV [edited] A contagious virus [panleukopenia virus] has forced dozens of animals to be removed from the Bartow County Animal Shelter. The state has now placed the Cartersville facility under cat quarantine. Animal control officers say the cats were exposed to \"feline distemper\", an especially contagious virus that came in from a single cat, either stray or surrendered, that didn't have the proper vaccination. The county and the Etowah Humane Society convinced the Fur Kids rescue in Doraville to take the cats in hopes that they can be cleared for adoption. [Mon 26 Jun 2017] morning, dozens of cats got shots and were then loaded up for a trip to the rescue in DeKalb County. Some of the cats are already symptomatic and will receive medical treatment. \"It's a very ugly disease,\" Animal Control Deputy Director Tommy Gentry said. \"Right now, we can't even pet them. We can't even touch them.\" A total of 3 cats have already been euthanized and even veteran animal control employees are feeling it. \"Twenty-seven years of doing it, it gets a little rough when a cat's put to sleep for no reason,\" Gentry said. \"You can't save them all but the ones you can save are very gratifying.\" Feline distemper is the same disease as Parvo in dogs. It starts with vomiting, diarrhea and dehydration and often leads to death. Gentry says Bartow County residents are getting frustrated that animal control is unable to respond to cat calls. He says the county is scrubbing down the facility and they hope to be reopened to cats within the next 72 hours. Fur Kids says the cats will remain quarantined until [Sun 9 Jul 2017], then will be free for adoption. In the meantime, the rescue is looking for donors to help defray the cost. [Byline: Jim Strickland] -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts [It is not unusual to see cases in shelters and boarding facilities. So make sure your cat is vaccinated before you drop her off. Feline panleukopenia is a highly contagious, often fatal, viral disease of cats that is seen worldwide. Kittens are affected most severely. The causative parvovirus [FPV] is very resistant; it can persist for 1 year at room temperature in the environment, if protected in organic material. Feline panleukopenia is now diagnosed infrequently by veterinarians, presumably as a consequence of widespread vaccine use. However, infection rates remain high in some unvaccinated cat populations, and the disease occasionally is seen in vaccinated, pedigreed kittens that have been exposed to a high virus challenge. Virus particles are abundant in all secretions and excretions during the acute phase of illness and can be shed in the feces of survivors for as long as 6 weeks after recovery. Being highly resistant to inactivation, parvoviruses can be transported long distances via fomites (such as shoes and clothing). However, FPV can be destroyed by exposure to a 1:32 dilution of household bleach (6 percent aqueous sodium hypochlorite), 4 percent formaldehyde, and 1 percent glutaraldehyde for 10 min at room temperature. Peroxygen disinfectants are also highly effective. Cats are infected oro-nasally by exposure to infected animals, their feces, secretions, or contaminated fomites. Most free-roaming cats are thought to be exposed to the virus during their 1st year of life. Those that develop subclinical infection or survive acute illness mount a robust, long-lasting, protective immune response. FPV infects and destroys actively dividing cells in bone marrow, lymphoid tissues, intestinal epithelium, and -- in very young animals --cerebellum and retina. In pregnant queens, the virus may spread transplacentally (across the placenta) to cause embryonic resorption, fetal mummification, abortion, or stillbirth. Alternatively, infection of kittens in the perinatal period may destroy the germinal epithelium of the cerebellum, leading to cerebellar hypoplasia (disorder found in cats and dogs in which the cerebellum is not completely mature at birth), incoordination, and tremor. FPV-induced cerebellar ataxia has become a relatively rare diagnosis, because most queens passively transfer sufficient antibodies to their kittens to protect them during the period of susceptibility. Most infections are subclinical, as evidenced by the high seroprevalence of anti-FPV antibodies among unvaccinated, healthy cats. Those cats that become ill are usually less than 1 year old. Peracute cases may die suddenly with little or no warning (fading kittens). Acute cases show fever (104-107 deg F [40-41.7 deg C]), depression, and anorexia after an incubation period of 2-7 days. Vomiting usually develops 1-2 days after the onset of fever; it is typically bilious and unrelated to eating. Diarrhea may begin a little later but is not always present. Extreme dehydration develops rapidly. Affected cats may sit for hours at their water bowl, although they may not drink much. Terminal cases are hypothermic and may develop septic shock and disseminated intravascular coagulation. Physical examination typically reveals profound depression, dehydration, and sometimes abdominal pain. Abdominal palpation --which can induce immediate vomiting -- may reveal thickened intestinal loops and enlarged mesenteric lymph nodes. In cases of cerebellar hypoplasia, ataxia and tremors with normal mentation are seen. Retinal lesions, if present, appear as discrete gray foci. The duration of this self-limiting illness is seldom greater than 5-7 days. Mortality is highest in young kittens less than 5 months old. A presumptive diagnosis is usually based on compatible clinical signs in an inadequately vaccinated cat and the presence of leucopenia (low white cell count). Neutropenia (low neutrophil count) is a more consistent finding than lymphopenia. Total WBC (white blood cell) counts less than 2000 cells/microliter are associated with a poorer prognosis. During recovery from infection, there is typically a rebound neutrophilia with a marked left shift. Diagnosis can sometimes be confirmed using an in-office immunochromatographic test kit intended for detection of fecal CPV [canine parvovirus] antigen. However, fecal antigen is detectable only for a short time after infection. False-negative results are common. Successful treatment of acute cases requires vigorous fluid therapy and supportive nursing care in the isolation unit. Electrolyte disturbances (such as hypokalemia), hypoglycemia, hypoproteinemia, anemia, and opportunistic secondary infections often develop in severely affected cats. Anticipation of these possibilities, close monitoring, and prompt intervention are likely to improve outcome. Intravenous (IV) fluid replacement and maintenance with a balanced isotonic crystalloid solution (such as lactated Ringer's solution with calculated potassium supplementation) is the foundation of therapy. B vitamins should be added to the infusion, together with 5 percent glucose if hypoglycemia is suspected or proved. In addition to crystalloid infusion, transfusion of fresh-frozen plasma helps support plasma oncotic pressure and provides clotting factors to severely ill, hypoproteinemic kittens. Whole blood is preferable for the occasional cat that is severely anemic. Parenteral, broad-spectrum antibiotic therapy is indicated; however, nephrotoxic drugs (such as gentamicin, amikacin) should be avoided until dehydration has been corrected. Antiemetic therapy (such as metoclopramide, ondansetron, maropitant) may provide some relief and allow earlier enteral feeding of soft, easily digested food. Parenteral nutrition is indicated for severely affected cases. Recombinant feline interferon omega (rFeIFN; 1 MU/kg/day SC for 3 days) should be considered for use in the treatment of feline panleukopenia. Although rFeIFN is not approved by the FDA for this purpose, it is approved and effective in the treatment of canine parvoviral enteritis. Excellent inactivated and modified live virus vaccines that provide solid, long-lasting immunity are available for prevention of feline panleukopenia. Live vaccines should not be given to cats that are pregnant, immunosuppressed, or sick, or to kittens less than 4 weeks old. Most authorities recommend that kittens receive 2 or 3 modified live vaccine doses subcutaneously, 3-4 weeks apart. The 1st vaccination is usually given at 6-9 weeks of age. The last dose of the initial vaccination series should not be administered before the kitten is 16 weeks old, to ensure that interfering maternal antibodies do not inactivate the modified live virus. Exposure to virus should be avoided until 1 week after the initial vaccination series has been completed. Cats should be revaccinated 1 year later, and triennially or less frequently thereafter, although some manufacturers continue to recommend annual revaccination. Portions of this comment have been extracted from and copied from the 2016 report. See also  . - Mod.MHJ] [Cartersville is 43 miles NW of Atlanta, within the northwest edge of the Atlanta metropolitan area ( ). - MOD.ML] [The state of Georgia can be located on the HealthMap/ProMED-mail interactive map at . A county map can be seen at  . - CopyEd.AO] [", "CHRONIC WASTING DISEASE, CERVID - USA (07): CONTROL HYPOTHESIS ************************************************************** A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases [1] Date: Mon 26 Jun 2017 Source: New York Times [edited] Dr. Zabel and his colleagues are developing plans to burn plots of National Park Service land in Arkansas and Colorado. If the experiments turn out as the researchers hope, they will spare some elk and deer a gruesome death. Across a growing swath of North America, these animals are dying from a mysterious disorder called chronic wasting disease. It's caused not by a virus or bacterium, but a deformed protein called a prion. When ingested, prions force normal proteins in the animal's body to become deformed as well. Over the course of months, the multiplying prions can gradually wreck the animal's nervous system, ultimately killing it. This year is the 50th anniversary of the discovery of chronic wasting disease. In the September issue of Microbiology and Molecular Biology Reviews, Dr. Zabel, an immunologist at Colorado State University, and his former graduate student Aimee Ortega survey what scientists have learned about the slow-spreading plague. [Link below. - Mod.MHJ] [It is a lengthy article and interested member should go to the NYT site to read the full article. - Mod.MHJ] [Byline: Mark D. Zabel] -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts ****** [2] Date: Wed 31 May 2017 Source: Microbiology & Molecular Biology Reviews [edited] Ref: Mark Zabel and Almee Ortega. The Ecology of Prions. Microbiol Mol Biol Rev. 2017;81(3). pii: e00001-17. doi: 10.1128/MMBR.00001-17. ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- Summary ------- \"Chronic wasting disease (CWD) affects cervids and is the only known prion disease readily transmitted among free-ranging wild animal populations in nature. The increasing spread and prevalence of CWD among cervid populations threaten the survival of deer and elk herds in North America, and potentially beyond. This review focuses on prion ecology, specifically that of CWD, and the current understanding of the role that the environment may play in disease propagation. We recount the discovery of CWD, discuss the role of the environment in indirect CWD transmission, and consider potentially relevant environmental reservoirs and vectors. We conclude by discussing how understanding the environmental persistence of CWD lends insight into transmission dynamics and potential management and mitigation strategies.\" -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail [This is a valuable review of the ecology of CWD and the authors float the hypothesis that control might be achieved by burning deer grazing. The key paragraph in their review article reads (without references): \"Controlled burning of landscapes in North America helps to mitigate \ufb01re danger in drought-stricken areas, in some of which CWD is endemic. Burning of plants, feces, and topsoil in these areas may reduce the low-level prion infectivity present in these areas. While the burn temperature and duration are certainly much lower than those attained in the experiments for which Brown et al. reported residual prion infectivity, naturally CWD contaminated areas certainly contain many orders of magnitude less prion infectivity than prion-infected SRM [specified risk material]. Prescribed burning may sufficiently lower prion titers on landscapes to at least impede the indirect transmission of CWD. Combined with directed hunter harvests, systematic culling, and targeted implementation of CWD vaccines, we may be able to stem the slow but steady spread of CWD across the landscape.\" Taking a flame thrower to an obviously contaminated site may well do some good but to a suspected meadow or normal deer habitat raises significant questions. I wish them luck. - Mod.MHJ ] [", "MERS-COV (43): SAUDI ARABIA, WHO ******************************** A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases In this update: [1] Saudi Arabia - WHO update 28 Jun 2017 (11-15 Jun 2017) [2] Saudi Arabia - Saudi MOH 28 Jun 2017 ****** [1] Saudi Arabia - WHO update 28 Jun 2017 (11-15 Jun 2017) Date: Wed 28 Jun 2017 Source: WHO Emergencies preparedness, response [edited] Middle East respiratory syndrome coronavirus (MERS-CoV) - Saudi Arabia [28 Jun 2017] -------------------------------- Between [16 and 23 Jun 2017], the national IHR Focal Point of Saudi Arabia reported 7 additional cases of Middle East Respiratory Syndrome Coronavirus (MERS-CoV) infection, including 2 deaths, and 4 deaths among previously reported cases. Details of the cases Three of the 7 newly reported cases are associated with clusters 1 and 3 as reported in the Disease Outbreak News published on [13 Jun 2017 and 19 Jun 2017]. Cluster 1 An additional 2 cases have been reported in this cluster in Riyadh City, Riyadh Region. In total, 34 laboratory-confirmed cases reported to WHO are associated with this cluster. Cluster 2 No newly reported cases are associated with cluster 2 as reported in the Disease Outbreak News published on [13 Jun 2017]. Cluster 3 An additional case has been reported in this cluster in Riyadh City, Riyadh Region. Thus far, this cluster involves 9 laboratory-confirmed patients. Globally, 2036 laboratory-confirmed cases of infection with MERS-CoV including at least 710 related deaths have been reported to WHO. Public health response The Ministry of Health is evaluating each case and their contacts and is still implementing the measures to limit further human-to-human transmission and bring these outbreaks to a control as described in the DON published on [19 Jun 2017]. Line listing of newly confirmed cases from 11-15 Jun 2017 Case no. / Date report WHO / City of residence / Age / Sex / HCW / Co-morbidities / Camel exposure / Camel milk / Exposure to other cases / Date of onset of symptoms / Date of hospitalization / Date of lab confirmation / Status / Date of outcome 1 / 2017-06-16 / Riyadh / 68 / M / No / Yes / No / No / Yes\u2020 / 2017-06-13 / 2017-05-28** / 2017-06-15 / Deceased / 2017-06-16 2 / 2017-06-17 / Riyadh / 41 / F / Yes / No / No / No / Yes\u2020 / NA / NA / 2017-06-17 / Alive 3 / 2017-06-18 / Hofouf 71 / M / No / Yes / NA / NA / NA / 2017-06-10 / 2017-06-15 / 2017-06-17 / Alive 4 / 2017-06-18 / Thadiq City / 22 / M / No / No / NA / NA / NA / 2017-06-16 / 2017-06-17 / 2017-06-18 / Alive 5 / 2017-06-19 / Riyadh / 42 / M / No / No / No / No / Yes\u2020 / NA / NA / 2017-06-18 / Alive 6 /2017-06-22 / Yanbu City / 85 / M / No / Yes / NA / NA / NA / 2017-06-16 / 2017-06-19 / 2017-06-21 / Deceased / 2017-06-22 7 / 2017-06-23 / Baha / 70 / M / No / Yes / NA / NA / NA / 2017-06-22 / 2017-06-16 / 2017-06-23 / Alive \u2020Case was detected through contact tracing of a previous MERS-CoV case. **Hospitalized for other unrelated condition prior to symptom onset. -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail Rapporteur Marianne Hopp ****** [2] Saudi Arabia - Saudi MOH 28 Jun 2017 Date: Wed 28 Jun 2017 Source: Saudi MOH 28 Jun 2017 [edited] Date: Tue 27 Jun 2017 Source: Saudi MOH 19-27 Jun 2017 [edited] As of today [Tue 27 Jun 2017], there have been a total of: 1671 laboratory-confirmed cases of MERS-CoV infection, including 677 deaths [reported case fatality rate 40.5 percent], 970 recoveries, and 24 currently active cases/infections. [As previously mentioned, the numbers of deaths, recoveries and currently active cases come from my spreadsheet tallies and differ from those listed on the Saudi MOH website; my spreadsheet counts asymptomatic infections.] Since the last ProMED-mail update [27 Jun 2017], there have been a total of: 0 newly confirmed cases/infections 0 newly reported fatalities, and 2 newly reported recoveries. Information on newly reported recoveries: - both were from Riyadh - both were involved in the nosocomial transmission clusters - both were non-Saudi nationals - both were asymptomatic contacts of previously confirmed cases 1- A 29-year-old male, non-healthcare worker, with no co-morbidities, reported on 5 Jun 2017. Classified as secondary healthcare acquired case in a patient. 2- A 45-year-old female, healthcare worker, with no co-morbidities, reported on either 7 or 12 Jun 2017. Classified as secondary healthcare acquired case in a healthcare worker. -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail [According to the above WHO update, as of 23 Jun 2017, there have been a total of 2036 laboratory confirmed cases of infection with MERS-CoV reported to WHO, including at least 710 related deaths. It appears as though clusters 1 and 3 of the nosocomial outbreaks have continued to report new cases. albeit at a significantly reduced pace than previously. Cases were reported from additional cities outside of Riyadh city, including Hufoof in Ash Sharqiyah region, Yanbu City in Al Madinah region and Baha city in Riyadh Region. Of note is confirmation that the case reported from Thadiq City on 18 Jun 2018 was the case reported from Riyadh by the MOH. Of note is that case no. 2 from the WHO update above was reported to have been a recovery on 21 Jun 2017. In the past 24 hours, there have been no newly confirmed MERS-CoV infections. The HealthMap/ProMED map of Saudi Arabia can be found at:  . - Mod.MPP] [", "ANTHRAX - INDIA (09): (ANDHRA PRADESH) CAPRINE, HUMAN CONFIRMED *************************************************************** A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Wed 28 Jun 2017 Source: The New Indian Express News Service [edited] The 5 patients from Kodupunjuvalasa village of Araku Valley who are undergoing treatment for skin infections at the King George Hospital (KGH) have been tested positive for cutaneous anthrax. Confirming the same, the doctors at KGH said that a group of people from the village consumed the meat of a goat that was already infected with _Bacillus anthracis_, the causal organism of cutaneous anthrax, some 3 weeks ago. A few of the group developed some skin rashes, but with the condition of 5 people -- KK (60), JS (45), J Gundu (50), PG (38) and GM (33) -- deteriorating, they were admitted into the KGH last Saturday with suspected anthrax symptoms, like skin ulcers and pustules. The reports for the samples that were sent to the lab for testing arrived on Tuesday [27 Jun 2017], and the patients were tested positive. \"The cutaneous anthrax spores can thrive for more than 70 years in the soil. The animals get the spores into their stomachs while grazing. Tribals contract infection if they eat the infected meat or through cuts and abrasions in their body while cutting the animal flesh,\" explained B Balachandrudu, HoD of the dermatology department of KGH. However, he said that cutaneous anthrax is not fatal, for it can be cured with regular [antibiotics]. \"As the disease spreads mostly during the monsoon, it can be prevented if the people become careful while eating meat of dead infected animals. Besides, the animal husbandry department should identify the areas prone to the disease and administer vaccines to the domestic animals,\" he added. Meanwhile, the district administration has deployed a team of health officials to organise medical camps in the village and its surrounding habitations. DM&HO Uma Sundari has sent a letter to the DRDE laboratory in Gwalior. \"A team will be visiting the place very soon and collect samples from soil and animals. The areas vulnerable to such diseases will be identified,\" she said. Asked about the vaccination drive in the entire agency area, the DM&HO said that unless the animals are affected, there is no need for vaccination. \"Anthrax was reported in Hukumpeta mandal last year [2016], and the animals in that area are being administered vaccines, which will continue for 5 years. Now, similar steps will be taken for Kodupunjuvalasa too,\" she said. Soon after the suspected anthrax cases came to light, the medical and health authorities were instructed to organise special camps in all areas surrounding Kodipunjuvalasa. According to the DM&HO, the disease, which spreads from animals to humans, can be prevented by educating the locals to bury the dead animals deep in the soil or at places far away from human habitations. Meanwhile, HRD minister Ganta Srinivasa Rao visited KGH and interacted with the patients. With around 100 houses in Kodupunjuvalasa village, the residents share farm produce, food and other provisions. \"The goat was not keeping well and stopped taking fodder properly for 2 days. So, we killed it and cooked the meat. After 20 days, some of us got skin infections, and it gradually spread to hands and feet,\" said GM, a patient. According to the tribals, it is the 1st time that such a case was reported from the village. However, a similar case was reported in Padmapuram Panchayat near Kodipunjuvalasa village some 2 years ago. But the residents said poor sanitation in the locality results in spreading of malaria and typhoid regularly. \"The government has provided funds for the construction of toilets. But, people are [not?] maintaining them properly. Viral infections are regular phenomena in the village. But, now anthrax is scaring us, as we are in a habit of eating meat,\" Mangalayya said. -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail [I would be surprised if the animal anthrax was limited to just one goat. For starters, goats are browsers and primarily eat the leaves off bushes and scrub. The latter get contaminated by blow flies, after feeding on a carcass, go to the leaves, and vomit up their blood meal. They then eat the clotted blood, and the vegetative cells in what remains sporulate and infect the next goat that comes browsing. If the villagers had slaughtered, butchered, and consumed a previous sick animal but no one fell ill, they probably would not mention it. For a description and pictures of the area, and a map, go to:  . - Mod.MHJ A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  .] [", "HANTAVIRUS - AMERICAS (37): PANAMA (LOS SANTOS) *********************************************** A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Tue 27 Jun 2017 Source: Panama America [in Spanish, trans. Mod.TY, edited] A mother and son are positive for hantavirus cardiopulmonary syndrome in the Los Santos province. The Ministry of Health reported that these patients, 56 and 37 years old, respectively, are residents of Las Tablas and currently in stable condition in the Anita Moreno Hospital in La Villa, Los Santos. These are the 1st 2 positive cases with cardiopulmonary syndrome since febrile [hantavirus infection] cases were reported over the past months [not cardiopulmonary syndrome cases]. The 2 patients are being attended to in the intensive care unit of that hospital in La Villa. In 2016, there were no cases of hantavirus [infection], whereas in 2015, 25 cases were registered. [Byline: Zenaida V\u00e1squez] -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts [Hantavirus cardiopulmonary syndrome (HPS) is a serious disease and can develop quickly, with a case fatality rate of around 30 percent. This report does not give any details about the circumstances that led to the infections nor specify the hantavirus involved in this case. As noted in comments on previous cases, Los Santos and adjoining provinces are endemic for Choclo hantavirus. Although no data on these or the previous cases in earlier years include an indication of which hantavirus is responsible, Choclo is the only one of the 3 hantaviruses known to be endemic in Panama that causes HPS. In the report above, no mention is made of the ecological setting in which the infection occurred. The croplands and food sources of the area, such as stored grain, attract the rodent host of Choclo virus. The preventive measures indicated in previous reports included elimination of sites attractive to rodents. No vaccine is available for Choclo virus. The rodent host of Choclo virus is the pygmy rice rat (_Oligoryzomys fulvescens_), a photograph of which can be accessed at  . These rodents occur in and around agricultural areas and adjacent houses and buildings. Maps of Panama can be accessed at  and  . - Mod.TY] [", "EQUINE INFECTIOUS ANEMIA - GERMANY (03): (HAMBURG, BAVARIA) SPREAD ****************************************************************** A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases In this post: [1] A new case of EIA, Hamburg [2] 5 new EIA cases, Bavaria ****** [1] A new case of EIA, Hamburg Date: Mon 26 Jun 2017 Source: Pferderevue [in German, trans. submitter SZ, edited] After [Fri 23 Jun 2017] confirmation of a 3rd case of EIA [equine infectious anemia] there is now suspicion of an additional case. A holding in Hamburg-Osdorf is affected, according to the Health and Consumer Protection Authority information upon request of 'Pferderevue' on [Mon 25 Jun 2017]. A horse stabled at the premise was tested by a private laboratory for equine infectious anemia. The official test result by the Friedrich-Loeffler-Institut is still pending. As a precautionary measure, protective measures have already been taken, and blood samples have been obtained from the other horses of the holding. The results are expected at the end of the week. Yet, it has not been established whether the cases from Hagen-Grinden, D\u00fcsseldorf-Kalkum, Bad Bentheim and now Hamburg-Osdorf are connected. The epidemiological investigations of the positive samples showed that the horse from the district of Verden had previously participated in an official polo tournament in Bad Bentheim. Further connections are under investigation. -- Communicated by: Sabine Zentis Castleview English Longhorns Gut Laach D-52385 Nideggen Germany [We are informed by the communicator that the new case in Hamburg, described above, has now been officially confirmed by the laboratory. Additional EIA cases have been detected in the meantime, in Bavaria; see further. - Mod.AS] ****** [2] 5 new EIA cases, Bavaria Date: Mon 26 Jun 2017 Source: Pferderevue [in German, trans. submitter SZ, summ., edited] More cases of new infections with the deadly equine infectious anemia are reported. On [Tue 27 Jun 2017] 5 new cases of the disease became known. In addition to North Rhine-Westphalia, Hamburg and Lower Saxony; Bavaria is now also affected. Since the occurrence of a disease in a stable in Hagen-Grinden in the district of Verden at the beginning of June [2017], the number of infected horses has increased every week. There are currently 9 horses infected. As it became known on [Tue 27 Jun 2017], infection was revealed during the serological examination of horses at the equestrian and polo clubs in Dusseldorf. The 1st case of infection had been reported there on [18 Jun 2017]. Now 2 more horses are infected. They have to be killed, because EIA is regarded as incurable. Any attempt of treatment is prohibited. For the remaining 50 horses of the Poloclub there might be hope. As club president Dirk Baumg\u00e4rtner told RP online, the first results of their blood tests were all negative. Further infections are in Bavaria. Recently, an outbreak of equine infectious anemia was officially confirmed in a horse stable in Tagmersheim in the district of Donau-Ries. The 3 animals concerned have to be euthanized. The affected stable is closed for 3 months in accordance with the legal requirements on the Protection against the EIA and a restricted area is established within a radius of 1km [approx 0.6 mi]. In the restricted area, all horse owners must house their animals and contact the veterinary authorities. The horses must be examined clinically and serologically (Coggins test). Healthy animals must be re-tested after 3 months. Only when all horses in the restriction zone are negative in the 2nd test, the restrictions may be lifted. Outside the restricted area, all private and commercial horse owners in the Donau-Ries region are requested to register their horses with the Veterinary Office Donau-Ries and to report any suspicion indicative of infection with the EIA virus in their horses. -- Communicated by: Sabine Zentis Castleview English Longhorns Gut Laach D-52385 Nideggen Germany [Equine infectious anemia (EIA) is a persistent viral infection of equids. The causative agent, EIA virus (EIAV) is a lentivirus in the family _Retroviridae_, subfamily _Orthoretrovirinae_. Other members of the genus Lentivirus include: bovine immunodeficiency virus; caprine arthritis encephalitis virus; feline immunodeficiency virus; human immunodeficiency virus 1; human immunodeficiency virus 2; and maedi/visna virus. EIA can be diagnosed on the basis of clinical signs, pathological lesions, serology and molecular methods. Infected horses remain viraemic carriers for life and, with very rare exceptions, yield a positive serological test result. Antibody response usually persists and antibody-positive animals, older than 6-8 months, are identified as virus carriers (below 6-8 months of age, serological reactions can be due to maternal antibodies; status can be confirmed by molecular techniques). Infected equids are potential virus reservoirs. Biting flies are mechanical vectors for the virus in nature. The above and additional information on EIA are available at  . Summarised information on the 3 previous EIA outbreaks in Germany since the start of the current thread/event on 2 Jan 2017, with links to the separate OIE reports, is available, with a map, at  . Since 2012, when a total of 12 EIA cases were reported in Germany, its incidence declined. During the subsequent years 2013-2016, the figures were, respectively, 0, 2, 4, and 0. The current increase, observed in several separate locations, deserves a common epidemiological investigation. - Mod.AS A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  .] [", "VIRAL HEMORRHAGIC SEPTICEMIA, FISH - SLOVAKIA: (BRATISLAVA), OIE **************************************************************** A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Wed 28 Jun 2017 Source: OIE, WAHID (World Animal Health Information Database), weekly disease information 2017; 30 (26) [edited] Viral haemorrhagic septicemia, Slovakia --------------------------------------- Information received on [and dated] on 28 Jun 2017 from Dr Jozef Bires , Director & Chief Veterinary Officer , State Veterinary and Food Administration , Ministry of Agriculture, BRATISLAVA, Slovakia Summary Report type: immediate notification Date of start of the event: 23 May 2017 Date of confirmation of the event: 14 Jun 2017 Reason for notification: Reoccurrence of a listed disease Date of previous occurrence: 4 Oct 2016 Manifestation of disease: Sub-clinical infection Causal agent: viral haemorrhagic septicaemia virus (VHSV) Nature of diagnosis: laboratory (basic) This event pertains to a defined zone within the country New outbreaks (1) Summary of outbreaks: Total outbreaks: 1 Outbreak 1: Stupava, Senec, Bratislava Date of start of the outbreak: 23 May 2017 Outbreak status: continuing (or date resolved not provided) Epidemiological unit: pond Water type: fresh water Population type: farmed Production system: semi-closed Total animals affected: Species / Morbidity / Mortality / Susceptible / Cases / Deaths / Dilled and disposed of / Slaughtered Rainbow trout (_Oncorhychus mykiss_) (kg) /0.33 percent / 0 percent / 300 / 1 / 0 / 0 / 300 Affected population: Disease was detected in fish intended for slaughter for human consumption during regular spring monitoring of fish diseases. Outbreak statistics [rates apparent, expressed as percentages]: Species / Morbidity rate / Mortality rate / Case fatality rate / Proportion susceptible animals lost* Rainbow trout (_Oncorhychus mykiss_) (kg) / 0.33 / 0 / 0 / 100 * Removed from the susceptible population through death, destruction and/or slaughter Epidemiology Source of the outbreak(s) or origin of infection: unknown or inconclusive Control measures Measures applied: movement control inside the country, surveillance within infected and/or protection zone, traceability, quarantine, emergency harvest, zoning, killing for commercial use or own use, disinfection, vaccination permitted (if a vaccine exists), no treatment of affected animals. Measures to be applied: No other measures Diagnostic test results Laboratory name and type: Veterinary and Food Institute in Dolny Kub\u00edn (National laboratory) Species / Test / Test date / Result Rainbow trout (_Oncorhychus mykiss_)/ polymerase chain reaction (PCR) / 14 Jun 2017/ Positive Future reporting The event is continuing. Weekly follow-up reports will be submitted. The location of the outbreak can be seen on the interactive map included in the OIE report at the source URL above. -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail [\"Viral haemorrhagic septicaemia (VHS) is considered to be a disease caused by infection with viral haemorrhagic septicaemia virus (VHSV, synonym: Egtved virus). VHS is a disease of farmed rainbow trout, farmed turbot, farmed Japanese flounder as well as a broad range of wild freshwater and marine species caused by VHSV, a virus belonging to the genus _Novirhabdovirus, within the family _Rhabdoviridae_. Diseased fish may display nonspecific clinical signs in the early stages of infection, including rapid onset of mortality (which can reach up to 100 percent in fry), lethargy, darkening of the skin, exophthalmia, anaemia (pale gills), haemorrhages at the base of the fins, gills, eyes and skin, and a distended abdomen due to oedema in the peritoneal cavity. In the chronic state of infection, affected fish do not in general exhibit external signs. VHS can also occur in a nervous form, characterized by severe abnormal swimming behavior, such as constant flashing and/or spiraling\".  . - Mod.CRD A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  .] [", "SCRUB TYPHUS - INDIA (02): (HIMACHAL PRADESH) ********************************************** A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Tue 27 Jun 2017 08:16 PM Source: Statesman News Service [edited] With fear of scrub typhus in monsoons in the backdrop of 37 deaths reported from the state in 2016, the National Health Mission (NHM) has sent advisories to different districts to review the arrangements. There is a plan to mobilize health staff clean premises of all the health institutions and hospitals across the state in July to maintain hygienic conditions in rainy season. The schools in the state have also been asked to disseminate information on the 3 diseases and the precautions to be taken in the morning assemblies. \"All the Chief Medical Officers have been called for review meeting in Shimla on [Wed 28 Jun 2017] to take stock of preparations for scrub typhus, dengue and chicken guinea,\" said NHM Mission Director, Pankaj Rai. Talking to media persons, Rai, who was accompanied by senior doctors from the NHM, said 27 cases of scrub typhus have been reported so far [in] 2017. The peak season for the disease, however, is from July to November. \"Twenty eight persons died of scrub typhus in HP [Himachal Pradesh] in 2015, and 37 in 2016. There is no death reported so far in 2017,\" he said. Scrub typhus is a mite-borne disease, spread by rats. \"The people, who work on the grass and agriculture fields have more chances of getting the disease, although it can affect anyone who visits the grassy fields. Anyone who gets a high grade fever should see a doctor in the government health institutions and take the prescribed medicine,\" he said. Rai said proper Information Education and Communication (IEC) is being done across Himachal Pradesh for scrub typhus, dengue and chicken guinea. He said the dirty water clogged around the houses, in fields or near the localities, may lead to dengue and the people need to take precautions in this regard. Rai told the people to call up on 104 toll free number if there was any complaint about the services in the hospitals on these diseases. \"I joined a few months back in NHM and have found that not many people are using this phone number. We will popularize the service and upgrade the number, wherein all the complaints are forwarded to health institutions,\" he said. The MD said he also had plans to display the list of the 56 free drugs being given in the government hospitals. -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts [ProMED-mail has posted multiple reports of scrub typhus in several Indian states in the past, especially since 2011. For background information, see ProMED-mail post Scrub typhus - India (05): background http://promedmail.org/post/20111208.3546. Himachal Pradesh is a state located in Northern India, abutting the Tibet Autonomous Region on the east ( ). - Mod.ML A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  .] [", "AVIAN INFLUENZA, HUMAN (60): WHO, HUMAN-ANIMAL INTERFACE ******************************************************** A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Thu 15 Jun 2017 Source: WHO, Influenza at the Human-Animal Interface (HAI) [Summ., edited] Summary [17 May to 15 June 2017] --------------------------------  - New infections: Since the previous update, new human infections with influenza A(H7N9) viruses were reported.  - Risk assessment: The overall public health risk from currently known influenza viruses at the human-animal interface has not changed, and the likelihood of sustained human-to-human transmission of these viruses remains low. Further human infections with viruses of animal origin are expected.  - IHR compliance: All human infections caused by a new influenza subtype are required to be reported under the International Health Regulations (IHR, 2005).This includes any animal and non-circulating seasonal influenza viruses. Information from these notifications is critical to inform risk assessments for influenza at the human-animal interface. Avian influenza A(H5) viruses ----------------------------- Current situation: Since the last update on 16 May 2017, no new laboratory-confirmed human cases of influenza A(H5N1) virus infection were reported to WHO. Since 2003, a total of 859 laboratory-confirmed cases of human infection with avian influenza A(H5N1) virus, including 453 deaths, have been reported to WHO from 16 countries. Influenza A(H5) subtype viruses have the potential to cause disease in humans and thus far, no human cases, other than those with influenza A(H5N1) and A(H5N6) viruses, have been reported to WHO. According to reports received by the World Organization for Animal Health (OIE), various influenza A(H5) subtypes continue to be detected in birds in Africa, Europe and Asia. Avian influenza A(H7N9) viruses ------------------------------- Current situation: During this reporting period, 47 laboratory-confirmed human cases of influenza A(H7N9) virus infection were reported to WHO from China. Among these cases, one cluster of cases was reported; both cases in the cluster had exposure to live poultry. Cases were reported from Shaanxi province for the 1st time and cases had likely exposure in Inner Mongolia for the 1st time as well. Case and cluster details are presented in the table in the Annex of this document. As of 15 June 2017, a total of 1533 laboratory-confirmed cases of human infection with avian influenza A(H7N9) viruses, including at least 592 deaths, have been reported to WHO. The number of human infections with avian influenza A(H7N9) viruses and the geographical distribution of human cases in the 5th epidemic wave (i.e. onset since 1 October 2016) is greater than in any earlier wave. This suggests that the virus is spreading, and emphasizes that further intensive surveillance and control measures in both the human and animal health sectors are crucial. However, the number of reported confirmed cases has continued to decline over the past few weeks indicating that the peak of cases this wave was reached in mid-February 2017. According to reports received by the Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO) on surveillance activities for avian influenza A(H7N9) viruses in China, positives among virological samples continue to be detected in poultry from live bird markets, commercial and backyard farms. authorities in China have also announced plans to commence vaccination of domestic poultry in certain areas against infection with avian influenza A(H7) viruses beginning in July [2017]. Risk Assessment --------------- 1. What is the likelihood that additional human cases of infection with avian influenza A(H7N9) viruses will occur? Most human cases are exposed to the A(H7N9) virus through contact with infected poultry or contaminated environments, including live poultry markets. Since the virus continues to be detected in animals and environments, further human cases can be expected. Additional sporadic human cases of influenza A(H7N9) in other provinces in China that have not yet reported human cases are also expected. 2. What is the likelihood of human-to-human transmission of avian influenza A(H7N9) viruses? Even though small clusters of cases have been reported, including those involving healthcare workers, currently available epidemiological and virological evidence suggests that this virus has not acquired the ability of sustained transmission among humans, thus the likelihood is low. 3. What is the risk of international spread of avian influenza A(H7N9) virus by travellers? Should infected individuals from affected areas travel internationally, their infection may be detected in another country during travel or after arrival. If this were to occur, further community level spread is considered unlikely as this virus has not acquired the ability to transmit easily among humans. Overall Risk Management Recommendations ---------------------------------------  - WHO does not advise special traveller screening at points of entry or restrictions with regard to the current situation of influenza viruses at the human-animal interface. For recommendations on safe trade in animals from countries affected by these influenza viruses, refer to OIE guidance.  - WHO advises that travellers to countries with known outbreaks of animal influenza should avoid farms, contact with animals in live animal markets, entering areas where animals may be slaughtered, or contact with any surfaces that appear to be contaminated with animal faeces. Travellers should also wash their hands often with soap and water. Travellers should follow good food safety and good food hygiene practices.  - Due to the constantly evolving nature of influenza viruses, WHO continues to stress the importance of global surveillance to detect virological, epidemiological and clinical changes associated with circulating influenza viruses that may affect human (or animal) health. Continued vigilance is needed within affected and neighboring areas to detect infections in animals and humans. As the extent of virus circulation in animals is not clear, epidemiological and virological surveillance and the follow-up of suspected human cases should remain high.  - All human infections caused by a new influenza subtype are notifiable under the International Health Regulations (IHR, 2005). State Parties to the IHR (2005) are required to immediately notify WHO of any laboratory-confirmed case of a recent human infection caused by influenza A virus with the potential to cause a pandemic. Evidence of illness is not required for this report.  - It is critical that influenza viruses from animals and people are fully characterized in appropriate animal or human health influenza reference laboratories and reported according to international standards. Under WHO's Pandemic Influenza Preparedness (PIP) Framework, Member States are expected to share their influenza viruses with pandemic potential on a regular and timely basis with the Global Influenza Surveillance and Response System (GISRS), a WHO-coordinated network of public health laboratories. The viruses are used by the public health laboratories to assess the risk of pandemic influenza and to develop candidate vaccine viruses. -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail [Important links shared in the report: WHO Human-Animal Interface web page Cumulative Number of Confirmed Human Cases of Avian Influenza A(H5N1) Reported to WHO Avian Influenza A(H7N9) Information WHO Avian Influenza Food Safety Issues World Organization of Animal Health (OIE) web page: Web portal on Avian Influenza Food and Agriculture Organization of the UN (FAO) webpage: Avian Influenza OFFLU As mentioned in the last update as well, the 5th wave of Influenza A/H7N9 cases is evident of the evolutionary changes in the virus; although robust capacity for human to human transmission has not been acquired by this avian virus. It presents a formidable challenge for surveillance and monitoring as a potential pandemic candidate. - Mod.UBA] [", "MALARIA - INDIA: NEW DELHI ************************** A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Wed 28 Jun 2017 Source: The Pioneer [edited] After 5 long years, malaria is back in the national capital and the number of cases has shot up alarmingly to 113, of which 40 cases were detected this month [June 2017]. The National Institute of Malaria Research (NIMR) has found 2 new species of Anopheles stephensi (urban vector) and Anopheles culicifacies (rural vector) circulating this year [2017]. The parasitic infection was lying dormant after mutating, but it has made a comeback after a gap of 5 years at a time when Delhi is already reeling under the scourge of dengue and chikungunya. Experts have raised the red flag after the resurgence of this deadly parasite and have advised Government agencies to take adequate measures to arrest the spread of this deadly infectious disease that can play havoc with people's health. NIMR Director Neena Valecha told The Pioneer, \"The cases being reported now are because of better detection and surveillance. In Delhi, the nearby villages are adding to malaria cases because of poor hygiene and drainage system. About 40 percent patients have a travel history which suggests that people contracted the disease outside Delhi and once they came back, the infection spreads.\" Confirming this, a municipal official said, \"Of the 113 people suffering from malaria, 62 belonged to Delhi, while 51 of the cases diagnosed in Delhi were traced to other States.\" Dr Valecha added, \"We are working on the lines of the National Malaria Control Programme and the target is to eliminate it by 2030. This year [2017], we have found Anopheles stephensi and Anopheles culicifacies circulating. Incidentally, of the approximately 430 Anopheles species, only 40 to 50 transmit malaria. Earlier, Delhi had seen a few cases of malarial infection with Plasmodium vivax and Plasmodium falciparum parasite, but they were not much.\" \"Dengue and chikungunya are transmitted by the Aedes aegypti mosquito, while malaria is caused by the plasmodium parasite that is passed from one human to another with the bite of infected Anopheles mosquitoes,\" she explained. A senior SDMC official said a full-fledged awareness drive through distribution of pamphlets and plying of vehicles carrying loudspeakers, announcing dos and don'ts, has been launched for prevention of vector-borne diseases. Though the season of vector-borne diseases had ended in December, the city continues to report such cases, prompting authorities to prepare a roadmap for the combat plan. The season for the vector-borne diseases begins from mid-July and generally lasts until November. -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts [The last time ProMED reported malaria in New Delhi was in 2012. Malaria is a problem in many states in the monsoon season and the CDC advise malaria prophylaxis in the entire country including Mumbai and New Delhi ( ). It is especially difficult to control _Plasmodium vivax_ malaria due to the variable incubation times and multiple relapses (Anvikar AR et al. Epidemiology of Plasmodium vivax Malaria in India. Am J Trop Med Hyg. 2016 Dec 28;95(6 Suppl):108-120. doi: 10.4269/ajtmh.16-0163.  ). _P. vivax_ is most probably constantly introduced into New Delhi from other parts of india due to migration and reflect the state of malaria control in India overall. - Mod.EP A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  .] [", "TETANUS - ITALY: (SARDINIA) UNIMMUNIZED CHILD ********************************************* A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases [1] Date: Wed 28 Jun 2017 14:50 Source: ANSA [edited] An unvaccinated 10-year-old boy has developed tetanus, the 1st case in children in Italy for 30 years, after falling off his bike and cutting his head in Sardinia last weekend [24-25 Jun 2017], sources said. The boy's parents reportedly refused treatment with an anti-tetanus gel, sources at Oristano hospital said. The boy's condition is improving and his life is not in danger although he has typical symptoms including muscle cramps and some paralysis of cranial nerves, they said. -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts [It is unclear from the report what is meant by \"anti-tetanus gel\" but probably is specific hyper-immune tetanus immunoglobulin although the following post states it was tetanus toxoid. If the child was truly unimmunized against tetanus, a combination of passive protection with immunoglobulin and active immunization with toxoid is always recommended. - Mod.LL] ****** [2] Date: Thu 29 Jun 2017 10:17 CEST+02:00 Source: The Local [edited] A 10-year-old boy in Sardinia has been diagnosed with tetanus. \"It's an incredibly rare case,\" Giovani Zanda, head of the pediatric ward at San Martino Di Oristano Hospital in western Sardinia, told Corriere della Sera. It is the 1st registered case of tetanus in a child in Italy for 30 years, according to a spokesperson for the country's National Health Institute. The 10-year-old boy was admitted to hospital with a cut to his forehead caused by a bicycle injury a few weeks ago. Doctors back then suggested a tetanus vaccination as a precaution but the parents apparently refused it. When the child returned to hospital weeks later, the tetanus had already incubated and reached an acute stage, according to a report in ANSA. Doctors were alerted to the tetanus symptoms after the patient experienced facial paralysis. The child has been treated and is said to be in a stable condition. The case however has raised alarm bells and adds weight to the government's much-discussed recent law that makes vaccinations a mandatory part of school inscription. The law makes 12 vaccinations obligatory for all children. These include, among others, preventive vaccinations for measles, hepatitis B and, tetanus. Several northern regions have legally challenged the decree. According to the new law, families who don't vaccinate their children aged between 6 and 16 will be fined and directed to make an appointment with their closest health center. Families who don't adhere to the law could be fined up to 7500 or even have be stripped of custody, according to Wired. The law comes into effect from the beginning of the 2017-2018 school year and there is a one-year transition period envisioned. According to the Ministry of Health's own guidelines, the main changes to the law involve an increase in the number of compulsory vaccinations from 4 to 12. Vaccinations also become a mandatory prerequisite for registration in kindergartens for children aged up to 6. \"The tetanus case represents an exception that certainly could have been avoided if the young patient had been vaccinated,\" said Zanda, the doctor who treated the child with tetanus, as reported in Corriere della Sera. -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail [This case is reported to be the 1st case of tetanus in a child in Italy but certainly not the 1st case of tetanus in 30 years overall. The following paper discusses adult cases of tetanus in the county occurring in the period between 2001 and 2010: Filia A, Bella A, von Hunolstein C, et al: Tetanus in Italy 2001-2010: a continuing threat in older adults. Vaccine. 2014;32: 639-644. Abstract: \"Despite being a completely preventable disease, tetanus cases continue to occur in Italy and notification and hospitalization rates have been reported to be higher with respect to European and other industrialized countries. We examined statutory notification, hospitalization, mortality and seroprevalence data to describe tetanus epidemiology in Italy from 2001 to 2010. A total of 594 tetanus cases were notified, with an average annual incidence of 1.0/1 000 000 population. Most cases were unvaccinated or incompletely vaccinated. 80 percent of cases occurred in subjects aged >64 years and a higher proportion of females with respect to males were reported in this age group. The annual number of hospital admissions was 1.4-1.7 times greater than the number of notifications in the same year. The mean annual number of reported deaths was 21. Seroprevalence data show progressively higher susceptibility levels with increasing age. Over 50 percent of persons aged 45-64 years and over 2 3rds of subjects \u226565 years had tetanus antibody levels . The following is extracted from the CDC vaccination recommendations for tetanus ( ): \"There are 4 combination vaccines used to prevent diphtheria, tetanus and pertussis: DTaP, Tdap, DT, and Td. Two of these (DTaP and DT) are given to children younger than 7 years of age, and 2 (Tdap and Td) are given to older children and adults. Several other combination vaccines contain DTaP along with other childhood vaccines. Children should get 5 doses of DTaP, one dose at each of the following ages: 2, 4, 6, and 15-18 months and 4-6 years. DT does not contain pertussis and is used as a substitute for DTaP for children who cannot tolerate pertussis vaccine. Td is a tetanus-diphtheria vaccine given to adolescents and adults as a booster shot every 10 years, or after an exposure to tetanus under some circumstances. Tdap is similar to Td but also contains protection against pertussis. Adolescents 11-18 years of age (preferably at age 11-12 years) and adults 19 through 64 years of age should receive a single dose of Tdap. For adults 65 and older who have close contact with an infant and have not previously received Tdap, one dose should be received. Tdap should also be given to 7-10 year olds who are not fully immunized against pertussis. Tdap can be given no matter when Td was last received. [Upper-case letters in these abbreviations denote full-strength doses of diphtheria (D) and tetanus (T) toxoids and pertussis (P) vaccine. Lower-case \"d\" and \"p\" denote reduced doses of diphtheria and pertussis used in the adolescent/adult-formulations. The \"a\" in DTaP and Tdap stands for \"acellular,\" meaning that the pertussis component contains only a part of the pertussis organism.].\" - Mod.LL A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  .] [", "CHOLERA, DIARRHEA AND DYSENTERY UPDATE (63): AFRICA, ASIA ********************************************************* A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases In this update: Africa [1] Cholera - Kenya (Nairobi) hotel conference guests [2] Cholera - Kenya (Nairobi) [3] Cholera - Somalia [4] Cholera - Sudan [5] Cholera - Sudan (South Kordofan) [6] Cholera - Sudan (South Darfur) [7] Cholera - Nigeria (Kwara State) [8] Cholera - South Sudan (Eastern Equatoria) Asia [9] Cholera - Philippines (Lanao del Sur Province) ****** [1] Cholera - Kenya (Nairobi) hotel conference guests Date: Wed 28 Jun 2017, 11:42 AM GMT +3 Source: Standard Digital [edited] A total of 6 tests carried out on visitors at the Weston hotel last week [week ending 25 Jun 2017] have confirmed there was a cholera outbreak. County health executive Bernard Muia yesterday [Tue 27 Jun 2017] confirmed it was indeed a cholera outbreak and is now spearheading a team of 15 to comb the city for other related incidents. Consequently, the Nairobi County government has now ordered a full evaluation of all food handlers in city eateries and hotels in a bid to curb the cholera outbreak. According to health officials, out of 25 samples collected from the visitors who started experiencing vomiting and diarrhea after consuming food at Weston, 6 were confirmed to have contracted the disease. \"We had to get evidence that it was indeed cholera and now that we have, all that is remaining is to get to the root cause or origin of the disease,\" said Muia. Muia said that the 15-man task force formed to probe the issue would give a report within 10 working days. This will in turn enable the health administration to take action on those found responsible for the disease outbreak. \"If the hotel is found to have breached the health regulations, we will act in accordance with the Public Health Act,\" he added. At the same time, the health boss has ordered for the immediate inspection of all food handlers in city hotels and eateries. This, he said, was to ensure that they had valid food handling certificates and the members of staff had undergone the required medical examination twice a year. \"Through the validation exercise, the task force will be looking into possible new cases of the disease across Nairobi which if any will be treated immediately. We are taking preventive and curative measures to ensure that such an incident never happens again,\" said Muia. Dr Muia warned that hotels found not to have a valid food license would be closed immediately as they are putting citizen lives in danger. Nairobi Water and Sewerage Company has now been urged to ensure efficient chlorination of water and fix burst pipes, which could lead to the contamination of water. Nairobians in turn are being asked to observe high hygienic standards such as washing hands, drinking treated or boiled water and eating food cooked from a source which is not contaminated. Since the incident last week, 4 cholera treatment centres have been reactivated and the county disease surveillance team put on high alert. They are located in Mukuru Kwa Reuben and Huruma Lion's Health Centre. \"Nairobians should improve their hygiene then we won't have a repeat of such an incident,\" said Muia. [Byline: Josphat Thiong'o] -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail [Despite what seemed to be a relatively short incubation period, it appears that at least some of the cases related to this hotel-associated outbreak are due to _V. cholerae_, although it is not clear what test was used for identification. - Mod.LL] ****** [2] Cholera - Kenya (Nairobi) Date: Sun 25 Jun 2017 Source: Mediamax, a K24 TV report [edited] Two people have tested positive for cholera at the Lions Treatment Centre in Huruma, Nairobi, sparking fears that the cholera outbreak in the city could be spreading fast. This comes hot on the heels of a report that over 20 doctors in Nairobi had been presented with cholera related symptoms after attending a conference in the city. -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts ****** [3] Cholera - Somalia Date: Wed 28 Jun 2017, 6:24 PM Source: XinHuaNet [edited] An outbreak of cholera/acute watery diarrhea (AWD) in Somalia has killed 795 people since January 2017, the UN humanitarian agency said on [Wed 28 Jun 2017]. The UN Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) said in its latest bulletin that there was a 19 percent decrease in the number of new cases in the 1st week of June 2017, which can be attributed to timely and effective intervention efforts over the past months. The UN which also cites figures from the ministry of health of Somalia reported 1979 AWD/cholera cases and 13 deaths between [12 and 18 Jun 2017]. Of these, 337 cases were reported from Wadajir district in Banadir region. \"A cumulative total of 53 015 cases including 795 deaths have been reported since the cholera outbreak started in January 2017. The case-fatality rate of 1.5 percent remains above the emergency threshold of 1 percent,\" the UN said. Of the reported cases, 53 percent affected children under 5 with most of the cases being reported in Wadajir in Banadir region, Harfo in Mudug, Dusamareb in Galgadud and Markka in Lower Shebelle region. The report said the health cluster, led by World Health Organization (WHO), is working collaboratively with the ministry of health, partners and health authorities to respond to the outbreak. The UN said lack of rains for consecutive seasons and poor rainfall in Somalia have led to a severe drought that has killed livestock and crops and displaced hundreds of thousands of Somalis, leaving around 6.7 out of 12.3 million people in urgent need of humanitarian assistance. According to the report, nearly 5.5 million people are at risk of contracting water-borne diseases like cholera. -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts ****** [4] Cholera - Sudan Date: Wed 28 Jun 2017 Source: AllAfrica, a Radio Dabanga report [edited] The first cases of cholera have appeared in a Sudanese refugee camp and a village in East Darfur, as 5 people reportedly died and more than 100 were infected. Sheikhs in Kriu refugee camp, 35 km [approx. 22 mi] south of Ed Daein city, reported the deaths of 3 refugees from cholera. A total of 61 people have been infected. \"Measures are being taken to address the spread of cholera in Kriu,\" a health worker in the camp told Radio Dabanga; \"16 cases of cholera were recorded in the camp yesterday, [Tue 27 Jun 2017].\" A total of 2 people died and 70 others were infected in Khazan Jadeed in Shearia locality. Health workers counted the killed and infected people on [Sat 24 Jun 2017], a health worker reported from the northern locality. \"Health authorities arrived in the area and have started to take action.\" Within a week, the first reports of the spread of cholera in Shangil Tobaya in North Darfur have been accompanied by reports of infections in South Darfur (Kalma camp) and East Darfur. Since the start of the outbreak of cholera in eastern and south-eastern Sudanese states, the WHO and the Sudanese Ministry of Health will not refer to the disease as cholera, but the less severe \"acute watery diarrhoea (AWD)\". The WHO has not replied to Radio Dabanga's repeated requests to comment on the spread of cholera. South Darfur ------------ People reported that a child died at Nyala Teaching Hospital on [Mon 26 Jun 2017], and said that the hospital received 2 new patients with cholera so far. One of the medical attendants told Radio Dabanga that the hospital administration evacuated the women's ward at the hospital in order to receive more patients, but other medical and health sources at the state health ministry have not confirmed this information to Radio Dabanga. Sheikhs in Kalma camp for displaced people said that the health centre in Block 6 received 4 new patients, from Blocks 2, 5 and 8 since yesterday [Tue 27 Jun 2017]. In Otash camp in Nyala locality, a sheikh reported that 4 displaced people were infected with cholera - 2 of whom were transferred to the World Vision health centre and 2 others to Nyala Teaching Hospital. Sources within the Ministry of Information has not confirmed this information. North and South Kordofan authorities close water wells and prohibit the sale of vegetables and meat Wells closed ------------ A committee of security agents went to Farshaya in South Kordofan on [Mon 26 Jun 2017], to close the water wells and curb the cholera outbreak. An informed source told Radio Dabanga that the decision to close the wells was rejected by the villagers because the single water engine left is not enough to provide drinking water to the area, and this might lead to friction between residents. The committee therefore decided to distribute large water skins to fill with water, the source said. Villagers demanded a radical solution of cholera awareness; spraying houses and provision of medical aids, among others. In total, the number of infections in Farshaya so far ran-up to 207 people and 21 deaths in the local health centre. As many as 13 to 20 cholera patients remain outside of the centre and 11 patients receive treatment indoors. \"The health centre does not have a general doctor and there is one medical assistant,\" the source said. Meanwhile in Delling, new cases reported to the hospital stopped at 2 or 3 people. The authorities have prohibited the sale of vegetables and meat for a period of time. More infections emerged in the western part of El Obeid, the capital of North Kordofan, which prompted health authorities to transform El Sayed El Makki school into a quarantined section. People in the area expressed fears that this may lead to a spread of infections among students at the start of the school year. Some considered extending the holiday period because of the outbreak, a listener reported to this station. Khartoum -------- Elbanjadeed Hospital in the densely populated El Haj Yousif district in Khartoum North received 6 new cases of cholera on [Mon 26 Jun 2017], after receiving 14 new cases over the weekend. The total number of cholera patients is 15. The UN Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) in Sudan reported in its latest bulletin that the federal Ministry of Health and WHO are working together to contain the spread of cholera - called \"acute watery diarrhea\" by the Sudanese authorities. -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts ****** [5] Cholera - Sudan (South Kordofan) Date: Mon 26 Jun 2017 Source: Radio Tamazuj [edited] A total of 14 cases of cholera, mostly children were recorded in Al Abassiya Tegeli Hospital in Sudan's South Kordofan State over the weekend, multiple sources said. The sources told Radio Tamazuj on [Sun 25 Jun 2017] that the hospital had received 14 cases of cholera, 3 of which have already been discharged. He pointed out that the health facility is experiencing acute shortages of medicines. Cholera is an infectious disease that causes severe watery diarrhea, which can lead to dehydration and even death if untreated. It is caused by eating food or drinking water contaminated with a bacterium called _Vibrio cholera_. -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts ****** [6] Cholera - Sudan (South Darfur) Date: Mon 26 Jun 2017 Source: AllAfrica, a Radio Dabanga report [edited] On [Fri 24 Jun 2017], 3 residents of Kalma camp for the displaced near Nyala, capital of South Darfur, died of cholera. With the spread of cholera to South Darfur, 14 Sudanese states are now affected. Hussein Abusharati told Radio Dabanga that 3 other Kalma camp residents are infected as well. \"The South Darfur health authorities and staff of health organisations working in the state rushed to the camp, and allocated 2 emergency sites in the camp to receive the patients,\" he said. \"The organisations directed us to immediately report any suspected cases.\" Kalma, hosting more than 120 000 displaced, is one of the largest camps in Darfur. In the Naivasha camp for the displaced near Shangil Tobaya in North Darfur's Tawila locality, a girl died on [Fri 24 Jun 2017]. \"This brings the number of cholera deaths to 12 in a week,\" a Naivasha camp elder reported to this station. \"With 8 new cases last week, 96 camp residents are being treated for the disease.\" The elder complained about the poor health care in the makeshift isolation centre, the overcrowded ward, and the lack of medical staff in the camp clinic. He said they have called on the North Darfur health authorities to urgently provide adequate treatment and medical staff, and to organise awareness campaigns about the importance of hygiene and sanitation. The health unit in the area of Um El Kheirat area in South Kordofan's El Tadamon locality received 2 new cases of cholera on [Fri 23 Jun 2017]. The head of the unit reported that 2 older cases are still being treated. The Blue Nile state Minister of Health, Abdelrahman Bilal, reported last week [week ending 25 Jun 2017] that at least 40 people in the state are suffering from \"acute watery diarrhea\". The first cases were recorded in Blue Nile state in August 2016. The federal Health Ministry initially neglected the reports. A few months later, after the disease spread to neighboring states, medical doctors began to mention cholera. -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail ****** [7] Cholera - Nigeria (Kwara State) Date: Tue 27 Jun 2017 Source: Outbreak News Today [edited] Health officials have reported an outbreak of cholera in Kwara State in the western part of the country. The initial cases of acute watery diarrhea (AWD) started during the last week of April 2017. As of [14 Jun 2017], a total of 1178 suspected cases and 9 deaths (case fatality rate 0.8 percent) have been reported. As many as 4 local government areas have been affected, including Ilorin West (508 cases), Ilorin East (303 cases), Ilorin South (96 cases), and Moro (37 cases). The WHO says while Nigeria has ample capacity to respond to cholera outbreaks, this outbreak comes at a time when the country is already constrained by the ongoing humanitarian emergency and multiple diseases outbreaks. Many staff and resources are already committed in the response to this humanitarian situation. -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail ****** [8] Cholera - South Sudan (Eastern Equatoria) Date: Wed 28 Jun 2017 Source: 360 News [edited] At least 60 persons have been reported killed following the outbreak of cholera in South Sudan's Namurunynag State in Eastern Equatoria in the past 1 month, African Review said. Speaking on this, the local Governor, Mr. Louse Lobong Lojore, said the death toll could be higher as some occurred in remote locations and were not accounted for. Lojore further added that the first case was reported early May 2017, and many more were still being reported in several parts of the state. \"Of course, these are cases that we were able to reach but there are some in very remote areas where we are not able to access and get the data,\" Mr Lojore said. Cholera is a deadly disease caused by eating or drinking contaminated food or water. It can be prevented through proper hygiene and sanitation. The disease has claimed hundreds of lives in South Sudan since the country's independence in 2011. The cholera outbreak has also been confirmed in Juba with many other cases of the epidemic being reported across the country since its resurgence in 2016. In 2017 alone, about 200 people have lost their lives to cholera across the country, according to the Health ministry in Juba. There are also very strong indications that an airport in Cairo, Egypt has started screening passengers arriving from Sudan for signs of cholera. This is due to the reported outbreak there, the head of airport quarantine said. Similar measures are already carried out in Cairo airport for people arriving from Yemen due to an epidemic there. \"The number of doctors and health monitors in arrival halls has increased to monitor the flights and examine passengers coming from infected areas,\" Head of Airport Quarantine Medhat Qandil said. Qandil said any suspected cholera cases would be isolated and sent to hospital. Even if passengers do not show symptoms their details will be recorded so they can be monitored by Egyptian health authorities, he said. [Byline: Datboyjerry] -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail ****** [9] Cholera - Philippines (Lanao del Sur Province) Date: Wed 28 Jun 2017, 3:08 PM Source: Sky News [edited] The first cases of cholera have been recorded in emergency shelters for families fleeing the conflict in the southern Philippines city of Marawi. Almost a quarter of a million people have been forced to leave their homes, as the fight against IS-linked militants enters its 2nd month. Tens of thousands are now living in crowded evacuation centres, where the regional health secretary told Sky News conditions are \"below the threshold of any human being\". The cholera cases have been isolated. 'We want a regular uninterrupted supply of clean water, toilets for them to use, and of course decent living conditions,' Kadil Sinolinding, Secretary of Health for Mindanao, told Sky News. More than 3000 people are living at the centre, we saw 4 working toilets. \"The evacuation centre is way below the threshold of any human being,\" Mr Sinolinding said. \"But people content themselves. We are surviving. We are all survivors here.\" The small rural clinic where he spoke has become a basic hospital. -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts [Lanao del Sur is a province in the Philippines located in the Autonomous Region in Muslim Mindanao. The Marawi crisis ( ) also known as the Marawi City siege and the Battle of Marawi, is an ongoing armed conflict in Marawi, Lanao del Sur -- that started on 23 May 2017 -- between Philippine government security forces and affiliated militants of the Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant, including the Maute and Abu Sayyaf Salafi jihadist groups. - Mod.LL A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  .] [", "ROCKY MOUNTAIN SPOTTED FEVER (03) - USA: (TENNESSEE, NEBRASKA, LOUISIANA) FATAL ******************************************************************************* A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases [1] Tennessee (Warren County) Date: Wed 14 Jun 2017 Source: Macon County Times [edited] Health officials have warned about the threat of tick-borne illnesses after a 20-year-old from McMinnville died from a bite. She died after a 5-week battle with Rocky Mountain Spotted Fever. According to the Southern Standard, the disease was first diagnosed as the flu. The warm winter has meant more ticks, and officials with the Metro Public Health Department have tips to keep you and your family safe and sound. \"For most people, it may cause an itchy red spot on the skin, which is fairly normal as far as tick bites go,\" Brian Todd, of the health department, said. \"It's the more serious flu-like illness 2 to 5 days afterward, that's what we want people to be paying more particular attention to.\" Those symptoms might include a fever, rash, headache, nausea, abdominal and muscle pain and reddened eyes. It's important to know very few people who come down with Rocky Mountain Spotted Fever develop all symptoms, and the number of symptoms varies from person to person. The illness is easily treated with antibacterials if detected early. The best way to avoid tick-borne diseases is to prevent tick bites. Wear long shirts and pants in tall grass or treat your clothes with permethrin. Also, check for ticks on yourself and your pets after spending time outside. In Tennessee, the most dangerous illnesses spread by ticks are Rocky Mountain spotted fever and ehrlichiosis. In 2016, there were 581 cases of Rocky Mountain spotted fever in Tennessee; between 2004 and 2014, there were 16 deaths attributed to Rocky Mountain spotted fever in the state. Rocky Mountain spotted fever and ehrlichiosis are preventable by avoiding tick bites, promptly removing ticks that do get on the skin and seeking medical care for a fever or rash after a possible tick bite. -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail ****** [2] Nebraska Date: Wed 21 Jun 2017 Source: Nebraska TV, a KHGI report [edited] Rocky Mountain Spotted Fever (RMSF) have been confirmed in the Southwest Nebraska Public Health Department district which includes: Chase, Dundy, Frontier, Furnas, Hayes, Hitchcock, Keith, Perkins and Red Willow counties. \"RMSF is transmitted to humans by the bite of an infected tick,\" shares Melissa Propp, SWNPHD Public Health Nurse. \"It can be severe or even fatal if not treated in the first few days of symptoms. See your doctor immediately if you have been bitten by a tick and experience sudden onset of high fever, deep muscle pain, severe headache and chills.\" A rash may also develop but is often absent in the first few days. According to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) about 10 percent of people with RMSF never develop a rash. Most often, the rash begins within 5 days after the onset of fever as small, flat, pink, non-itchy spots on the wrists, forearms, and ankles and spreads to the trunk. It is a good idea to take preventive measures against ticks year-round, but especially in warmer months when ticks are most active. Some suggestions include: - Use repellents that contain 20-30 percent DEET [diethyltoluamide] on exposed skin and clothing for protection that lasts up to several hours. - Parents should apply DEET products to their children, avoiding hands, eyes and mouth. - Use products that contain permethrin on clothing, gear, and tents. - Walk in the center of trails. - Avoid wooded and brushy areas with high grass and leaf litter. - Mow lawns regularly, remove leaf litter/brush and prune low-lying bushes to let in more sunlight. - Keep woodpiles in sunny areas off the ground. \"If you are in areas with the potential for ticks, we recommend that you bathe or shower as soon as possible after coming indoors,\" explains Propp. \"It will be easier to find and wash off ticks that are crawling instead of attached.\" Some suggestions: - Conduct a full-body tick check on yourself and children as soon as you can. - Look closely under the arms, in and around the ears, inside the belly button, behind the knees, between the legs, around the waist and especially in their hair. - Examine gear and pets. Ticks can ride into the home on clothing and pets, and then attach to a person later. - Tumble clothes in a dryer on high heat for an hour to kill remaining ticks. -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail ****** [3] Louisiana (Calcasieu Parish) Date: Fri 16 Jun 2017, 7:33 PM EDT Source: 7KPLC TV [edited] A local doctor has seen 3 cases of Rocky Mountain spotted fever in Calcasieu Parish in the last several months. It's an illness that can be fatal if not treated promptly. Health officials say there's no cause for alarm, but suggest people be aware. It's the time of the year when there's more outdoor activity and more ticks, some of which carry Rocky Mountain spotted fever. Dr. Tim Haman, an infectious disease specialist, says he has seen 3 cases in Calcasieu Parish in the last 2 to 3 months. One was in Moss Bluff. He says he's not sure where the other 2 cases were from. \"It can be a very severe disease, especially in children. It can even be fatal. It typically presents with fever, at least 101 to 102 deg F [approx. 38 to 39 deg C], along with a rash that typically starts on the legs and spreads up toward the trunk,\" he said. Rocky Mountain spotted fever has received national attention this month since a toddler in Indiana died of the disease. It's on the rise in Louisiana. Still, Haman says there are only about 20 cases a year. \"Even though we've seen the number of cases double it's still less than 20 a year,\" he said. But if left untreated it can kill. So, Haman says, it's important to be aware of the symptoms. \"If it's not treated it can definitely be fatal,\" he said. However, the rash may not be present at the beginning. \"You can have the fever for several days before the rash pops up,\" said Haman. And prompt treatment with a specific antimicrobial called doxycycline is crucial and should be initiated before lab results may have confirmed the disease. \"You have to treat before the test is back. You can't wait for the test to treat,\" said Haman. [Byline: Theresa Schmidt] -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail [When the female tick harboring the organism attaches to a passing human, she usually starts low on the body after transferring from grassy vegetation or even directly or indirectly from a dog. After crawling around on clothes seeking an appropriate cutaneous site (wearing white clothes makes a wandering tick easier to spot), she attaches and begins to feed. If not already partially fed, after attaching, it generally takes 24 hours to activate and transmit the rickettsial organism. For this reason, daily or twice-daily tick checks with removal will minimize disease transmission. Ticks that attach in hairy areas such as the scalp or beard may be more difficult to find. The incubation period of the disease is about 1 week after the tick exposure, long after the tick has detached. The presenting illness is generally nonspecific, fever, muscle pains, headache (but the headache is usually described as quite severe). The rash begins on day 3 of the illness, initially maculopapular at the wrists and ankles before becoming petechial and purpuric, involving the palms and soles as well as spreading proximally to the trunk. Purpura usually is not seen before the 6th day of illness. The mortality is indeed quite low if treatment (usually a tetracycline) is begun during the 1st 2 days of the rash or before. Empiric treatment for this infection should always be begun in people with compatible symptoms inhabiting endemic areas during the spring and summer, even if no tick bite is known. The early rash of this disease can be seen at  . Delayed diagnosis contributes to morbidity and mortality of RMSF. The tetracyclines represent the best drug for treatment, even in children, and the following is the CDC statement in this regard https://www.cdc.gov/rmsf/doxycycline/index.html [updated 16 Mar 2015]: Background on doxycycline and older tetracycline antimicrobials --------------------------------------------------------------- Tetracyclines are broad-spectrum antimicrobials in use since the 1940s. Older tetracycline-class drugs have been linked to cosmetic staining of permanent teeth when used in children before the age of 8 years. As a result, in 1970 a warning label was attached to all tetracycline-class antibiotics advising against the use in children under the age of 8 years. In 1967 doxycycline was introduced as a newer tetracycline-class antibiotic. Doxycycline binds less readily to calcium and has not been shown to cause the same tooth staining. Several studies have previously been published showing the lack of staining of permanent teeth when doxycycline was used in children. The warning, currently present on all tetracycline-class antibiotics, including doxycycline, continues to mention the concern regarding dental staining. Doxycycline and rickettsial diseases ------------------------------------ Doxycycline is the most effective treatment of all rickettsial diseases including RMSF, ehrlichiosis and anaplasmosis. It is the antimicrobial recommended by the American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP) and CDC for the treatment of suspected rickettsial diseases in patients of all ages. Studies have shown that other antimicrobials are less effective and are associated with a higher number of deaths (case fatality rate). In a 2012 national survey, 80 per cent of clinicians correctly selected doxycycline as the treatment of choice for suspected RMSF in persons 8 years or older, however, only 35 per cent of clinicians correctly chose doxycycline as the treatment of choice for suspected RMSF in children under 8 years. This hesitation may contribute to the increased fatality rate among children. Children under the age of 10 years represent less than 6 per cent of RMSF cases, but they represent 22 per cent of deaths. The same disproportionate case fatality rate in children has been observed for ehrlichiosis and other serious rickettsial infections. Doxycycline is most effective when given within the first 5 days of illness. Because there is no rapid test to diagnose rickettsial diseases, clinicians must diagnose and treat based on clinical suspicion alone. It is important that concern about dental staining [should] not cause providers to use other antibiotics, or delay the start of treatment in children. The newest evidence ------------------- In 2013, researchers from CDC and the Indian Health Service [IHS] began looking into the subject of dental staining following doxycycline usage, to better understand if this is an issue. This study was performed to look at whether or not doxycycline, in the dose and duration used to treat suspected RMSF, caused dental staining in children less than 8 years. The study took place in a community which has suffered from high rates of RMSF since 2003, where a large number of people, including children, were treated with doxycycline. Dentists inspected the permanent teeth of children who had received doxycycline for suspected RMSF prior to their 8th birthday and those who had not. Blinded dentists (without knowing which children had received the drug) looked for tooth staining, evaluated tooth color, and looked for evidence of weakness in the tooth enamel for all children in the study. No differences were found between children who had received doxycycline and those who had not. This study provides the largest sample size and best evidence to date that short courses of doxycycline (such as those used to treat rickettsial diseases) do not cause dental staining when given to children under the age of 8 years. The current label allows for the use of doxycycline in pediatric rickettsial patients because other antimicrobials are not likely to be effective for treatment. However, clearer language on the drug label may help avoid hesitation in prescribing life-saving doxycycline to children, and reinforce CDC and AAP RMSF treatment recommendations. Despite the current label warning, it is important for healthcare providers to know that doxycycline has not been shown to cause tooth staining in the dose and duration used to treat rickettsial diseases. Early administration of doxycycline in adults and children can prevent severe illness and save lives. - Mod.LL A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  .] [", "RABBIT HEMORRHAGIC DISEASE - GUERNSEY: WILD RABBIT ************************************************** A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Thu 29 Jun 2017 Source: Guernsey Press [edited] Guernsey's wild rabbit population appears to be infected with a new fatal disease, the States Vet has confirmed. David Chamberlain said evidence suggested the source of Rabbit Viral Haemorrhagic Disease 2, which has been confirmed in a rabbit that died in the GSPCA (Guersney Society for Prevention of Cruelty to Animals)'s care as well as another privately owned pet rabbit, was likely to have been from wild rabbits. It is yet another disease that faces the island's wild population and RVHD-2 eradication is \"generally impossible\" if the virus becomes established in wild rabbit populations, Mr Chamberlain said. \"It is disappointing that Guernsey's wild rabbit population appears to be infected and this is likely to be as a result of midges and mosquitoes being carried on the wind from France,\" he added. \"It is likely that the wild rabbits across the Bailiwick are infected with RVHD-2 if it has been introduced by midges and mosquitoes. RVHD-2 is an additional challenge to Guernsey's wild rabbit population which is still challenged by feral ferrets and suffers cyclical outbreaks of myxomatosis.\" Myxomatosis and RVHD-1 and 2 do not cause disease in dogs, cats or humans. -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail [In the 1980s, the European rabbit (_Oryctolagus cuniculus_) populations were devastated by a virus that caused an extremely lethal and highly contagious disease, rabbit haemorrhagic disease (RHD). The 1st outbreak of this new disease was reported in 1984 in the Jiangsu Province of China within a group of commercially-bred Angora rabbits imported from Germany. As the virus spread worldwide, naturally occurring RHD outbreaks were reported in geographically distant regions, such as Cuba, Uruguay and Reunion Island. RHDV is a highly virulent lagovirus endemic in Europe and Australasian populations of _Oryctolagus cuniculus_. It has also caused several unexplained disease outbreaks in domestic European rabbits in North America. RHD is characterised by high morbidity and high mortality (70-90 percent), and spreads very rapidly by direct and indirect transmission. Infection can occur by nasal, conjunctival or oral routes. Transmission of RHD is facilitated by the high stability of the virus in the environment. The incubation period varies from 1 to 3 days, and death usually occurs 12-36 hours after the onset of fever. The clinical manifestations have been described mainly in the acute infection and are nervous and respiratory signs, apathy and anorexia. Clear and specific lesions, both gross and microscopic, are present. There is primary liver necrosis and a massive disseminated intravascular coagulopathy in all organs and tissues. The most severe lesions are in the liver, trachea and lungs. Over the past year there has been increasing concern regarding rabbit viral haemorrhagic disease \"new variant 2\" (RVHD-2) becoming a cause of several cases of rabbit mortality in the UK. RVHD-2 has been noted in the UK for at least 2 years. Portions of this comment were extracted from  . - Mod.PMB A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  .] [", "GASTROENTERITIS - BRAZIL: (RIO GRANDE DO SUL, ESPIRITO SANTO) REQUEST FOR INFORMATION ************************************************************************************* A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases [1] Possible salmonellosis - Rio Grande do Sul state Date: Tue 27 Jun 2017 16h 21 Source: Diario de Santa Maria [machine transl, edited] At least 150 people who participated in a luncheon party last [Sun 25 Jun 2017], in S\u00e3o Jo\u00e3o do Pol\u00easine, a municipality in the central region of Quarta, ended up stopping at the hospital with symptoms of food infection. The lunch, served in the parish hall of the Church of St John the Baptist, was part of the commemorations in honor of St John, performed by the parish. According to Aldir Dias, clinical director of the S\u00e3o Roque Charity Hospital in Faxinal do Soturno, 70 people were seen at the site on[ Mon 26 Jun 2017]. Another 80 received care at the Dr Roberto Binatto Health Center in S\u00e3o Jo\u00e3o do Pol\u00easine. On [Tue 27 Jun 2017], 6 people were hospitalized in both hospitals as a result of complications in the clinical setting. About 90 percent of the patients who experienced the same symptoms reported that they began to feel ill after eating a mayonnaise salad that was served for lunch. All patients were diagnosed with acute gastroenteritis, possibly with salmonellosis, Dias said. The doctor explained that the main symptoms presented by the patients were vomiting, diarrhea, severe abdominal pain, weakness and loss of appetite. In addition, dehydration was the main complication presented by people who had to be hospitalized. The clinical director's suspicion is that some food may have been contaminated or spoiled. The S\u00e3o Jo\u00e3o Pol\u00easine Sanitary Surveillance reported that on [Tue 27 Jun 2017] it would collect material from the parish to confirm what would have caused the general malaise. \"Now we have to wait for the results of the tests to find out if there is any spoiled or contaminated food,\" said a Health Surveillance official who declined to be identified. Treasurer at the parish, Moacir Possebom said it was too early to say the painting was caused by the food served at lunch. \"I cannot be certain that it was or even that it was not the food.\" Some people were here (in the parish) and told us that they had been ill even though they had not eaten any food that day. Other people also reported having eaten at lunch and showed no symptoms. We will wait for the results of the analysis to have a proof - said Possebom, claiming that his wife was one of the people who went wrong. [Byline: Michelli Taborda] -- Communicated by: Bruno Vizzotto UNIFRA [ProMED thanks Bruno Vizzotto for contributing this post. - Mod.LL] ****** [2] Possible staphylococcus foodborne illness - Esp\u00edrito Santo State Date: Mon 26 Jun 2017 08h33 Source: G1 [edited] Dozens of guests at a party went awry this [Sun 25 Jun 2017] with symptoms of gastroenteritis in Marata\u00edzes in the south of Esp\u00edrito Santo. Of the 130 consultations carried out until the beginning of Sunday afternoon, in the prompt care of Marata\u00edzes, 50 were people who presented symptoms of gastroenteritis. A 12-year-old teenager went with his father to his birthday party on [Sat 24 Jun 2017] night. He started to get sick at dawn and got worse in the afternoon. \"Pain in the stomach, pain in the belly, desire to vomit, headache,\" said the boy. The suspicion of the mother is that the food served at the party was the cause of the problem.\" Soon, I realized that was the cause of the birthday because my husband said he felt the food was not good,\" said the mother. All the patients who went to the hospital with the symptoms told the same story, they were at a birthday party, and hours after dinner was served, they started to feel bad. The party happened in a house, in the Siri Lagoon region, in Marata\u00edzes. A doctor explained that, in such events, care with the preparation of food should be redoubled to avoid contamination. \"A food, for example, that gets barely refrigerated, has the growth of bacteria and can lead to a subsequent infection,\" he said. -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail [The relatively short incubation period illness with upper gastrointestinal symptoms (nausea and vomiting) without diarrhea or fever being mentioned suggests preformed staphylococcal enterotoxin-induced illness. More information about both of these clusters of illness would be appreciated. - Mod.LL A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  .] [", "ANTHRAX - INDIA (09): (ANDHRA PRADESH) CAPRINE, MORE HUMAN CASES **************************************************************** A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Thu 29 Jun 2017 Source: Scroll In [edited] A total of 3 more cases of cutaneous anthrax were reported from Kodupunjuvalasa village in Araku Mandal district of Visakhapatnam on [Wed 28 Jun 2017], The News Minute reported. As many as 8 villagers have now been confirmed to be suffering from the illness, which is spread by contact with the spores of the bacteria, which are often from infectious animal products. Five people from the village had tested positive for anthrax on [Wed 28 Jun 2017]. All the patients are currently undergoing treatment in the dermatology department of King George Hospital. Doctors suspect that the villagers developed skin infections after they consumed the meat of a goat, which was infected with _Bacillus anthracis_, the bacteria that causes the disease. A door-to-door survey on the disease and living conditions of the tribals was conducted by District Medical and Health Officer Uma Sundari and a team from the department of dermatology of KGH. \"We have taken RT-PCR [reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction] test samples of the patients reportedly affected by anthrax and sent them to the DRDE Laboratory in Gwalior. A team from Gwalior will be visiting the agency area soon,\" Sundari was quoted as saying by The New Indian Express. State Human Resource Development Minister Ganta Srinivasa Rao, who had visited the anthrax-affected patients on [Tue 27 Jun 2017], said officials were working actively to curb the spread of the disease. The Animal Husbandry Department was also taking steps to ensure that animals do not get infected, he added. He also said that the soil would also be tested in and around Kodipunjuvalasa. Anthrax, which can be found naturally in soil, can result in pneumonia, blood infection, and death. It mainly affects animals, but can also spread to humans. -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail [Three more cases, yes, but what about possibly more affected goats? This is something that could have been determined while interviewing these new cases. When the vets run their community livestock vaccination it would be worthwhile asking each owner in turn about any unexpected livestock deaths, and then visiting what might remain of those carcasses. If there is a skull, sample the turbinates, otherwise the medulla of any long bone. And as the neighbours watch, it attracts gossip, and thus further information. - Mod.MHJ A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  .] [", "HEPATITIS E - EUROPE (02): 2005-2015 ************************************ A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Thu 29 Jun 2017 Source: Eurosurveillance, Volume 22, Issue 26 [edited] Hepatitis E virus infection in Europe: surveillance and descriptive epidemiology of confirmed cases, 2005 to 2015 ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- Hepatitis E virus (HEV) infection is one of the leading causes of acute viral hepatitis worldwide with 4 different genotypes (1-4) responsible for most human infections. HEV genotype 3 predominates in high-income countries, including those in Europe. Transmission of this genotype is usually zoonotic and has been linked to the consumption of pork products, and in some instances, shellfish [1-3]. Infection, which is most often asymptomatic, may cause an acute self-limiting hepatitis, with symptomatic infection more commonly reported among men older than 50 years of age [4,5]. Reports of chronic infection among immunocompromised people or those with pre-existing liver disease have been described [4]. There is evidence that HEV is an under-recognized pathogen in high-income countries, and that the incidence of confirmed cases has been steadily increasing over the last decade [6-10]. Although population studies have shown stable or decreasing seroprevalence rates [11,12], some countries have reported a consistently high seroprevalence and proportion of HEV-RNA-positive blood donors [13-16]. A systematic review conducted by the WHO reported HEV seroprevalence (as denoted by presence of IgG antibody) to range from 0.03 percent to 52 percent among the general population and blood donors in the WHO European Region, with the highest prevalence reported from studies in blood donors from France and the Netherlands [17]. Evidence of current HEV infection in up to 77 percent of patients presenting with symptomatic acute hepatitis suggests that the virus could be a considerable cause of liver morbidity in European countries [17]. However, the use of different serological test systems significantly influences the estimates of seroprevalence [18]. Europe-wide surveillance is not in place for hepatitis E, and the European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control (ECDC) has launched a number of activities that aim to better understand the current epidemiology, as well as the national monitoring systems for HEV infection within European Union/European Economic Area (EU/EEA) countries. A recent study involving HEV experts from 17 countries documented an increase in reported cases in nearly all EU/EEA countries that provided data, with France, Germany, England and Wales, and the Netherlands reporting more hepatitis E than hepatitis A notifications. The study also highlighted a lack of consistency in the reporting of cases, and wide variation in surveillance activity and case definitions [7]. The current study builds on this work to conduct a wider assessment of testing, diagnosis, surveillance activities and confirmed cases of HEV infection in the EU/EEA in order to inform the Europe-wide response to this emerging infection. Methods ------- A semi-structured survey of EU/EEA countries was conducted during 2015/16. The survey was divided into 4 sections (surveillance, testing and diagnosis, data on diagnosed cases, and transfusion-associated HEV infections) to allow separate country-level respondents for each topic area with a total of 24 open and closed questions [19]. A pilot survey was conducted at a meeting of the ECDC HEV expert group in December 2015, and a revised survey was subsequently circulated by email to nominated representatives of ECDC's networks, the National Focal Points for Food- and Waterborne Diseases and Zoonoses as well as for Microbiology and Surveillance, in February 2016. Respondents were given 3 weeks to complete the survey (which could be completed electronically), and email and phone reminders were used to follow up with those who had not responded. Returned survey data were manually extracted into Excel and double-checked. Any unclear responses were checked by email communication with the respective experts. Analyses were conducted in Excel and STATA version 13. The United Kingdom (UK) provided 3 separate responses (from England and Wales, Scotland, and Northern Ireland) which were considered as a single country response for all quantitative analyses and listed separately for qualitative analyses. A descriptive analysis was performed. The proportion of hospitalized cases was calculated using data exclusively from countries reporting hospital data, with the number of total cases as denominator. The Eurostat population database from 2015 was used as source of population denominator data [20]. Results ------- All EU/EEA countries with the exception of Liechtenstein responded to the survey, giving a response rate of 30 out of 31. The data provided from countries that conduct surveillance was comprehensive, detailed and of high quality. Hepatitis E surveillance systems: Of 30 responding countries, 20 had specific surveillance systems for HEV infection. The remaining 10 countries had more generic viral hepatitis syndromic surveillance with no plans to develop any specific surveillance for HEV infection. Of the 20 EU/EEA countries with specific systems for HEV infection, 15 had national surveillance systems, 3 had laboratory surveillance through national reference laboratories with unknown coverage, 1 had blood service surveillance with unknown coverage, and 1 had a sentinel surveillance system covering approximately half of the population. A total of 13 of 20 surveillance systems specific for HEV infection had a case definition for confirmed cases. There was wide variation in the type of case definition used: 7 used laboratory and clinical definitions, and 6 used a laboratory definition only (Figure 1 - for Figures and Tables, see original URL - Mod. LL0. Most surveillance systems collected demographic information as well as the date of notification and onset of disease, whereas morbidity and mortality data were collected less frequently (Table 1). Two countries' surveillance systems (Ireland and the UK (England and Wales)) differentiated between acute and chronic HEV infection: acute infection was defined as both HEV-IgM-positive and IgG-positive, or HEV-RNA-positive, and chronic infection was defined as HEV RNA persisting for at least 3 months. Hepatitis E testing and diagnosis --------------------------------- A total of 26 countries conducted HEV testing in their own countries, with 2 countries sending samples abroad for testing and 2 reporting their testing availability as unknown. In 12 countries, there were less than 5 laboratories able to conduct diagnostic tests for HEV. Laboratories in 20 countries used more than one type of test (Table 2). For HEV antibody testing in acute cases, IgM ELISA was used in 21 countries and IgM Western Blot in 11. Of the 22 countries using any IgM antibody test, 20 also used IgG ELISA and nine IgG Western Blot for the detection of IgG antibodies. Up to 19 countries reported that they were able to conduct HEV RNA testing; all used serum/plasma and 12 also used stool specimens. Up to 17 countries reported that HEV sequencing was conducted for epidemiological investigations (15 countries), for research purposes (14 countries) or as routine practice (10 countries). Ten countries provided information on why a laboratory might conduct a test for HEV. Two countries had a laboratory policy on testing for HEV: (i) UK (Scotland), where some laboratories automatically test for HEV if alanine transaminase (ALT)\u2009was \u2265\u2009100 U/L, and (ii) Ireland, where an HEV test is automatically conducted if a test for hepatitis A virus (HAV) is requested. The remaining countries reported that HEV testing was conducted only at the request of a clinician. Confirmed cases of hepatitis E virus infection ---------------------------------------------- A total of 22 countries covering 469 million people (i.e. 91 percent of the EU/EEA population of 514 million people) provided data on confirmed cases of hepatitis E (Figure 2). The total number of reported cases increased from 514 cases in 2005 to 5617 cases in 2015, with 21 018 cases overall during the 11-year period studied (Figure 2). A total of 93 percent (19 531/21 018) of cases were accounted for by countries that have had hepatitis E-specific surveillance since at least 2005, and 80 percent (16 810/21 018) of cases were reported from just 3 countries (Germany, France, and the UK), which comprise 41 percent of the EU/EEA population. In 16 countries providing data on the age of reported cases, the overall proportion of those aged more than 50 years increased from 30-47 percent during 2005-2008 to 60-61 percent during 2013-2015. In 17 countries providing data on the sex of reported cases, the proportion of male cases remained stable over 2005-2015, ranging from 61 percent in 2005 and 2015 to 69 percent in 2006. Severity associated with hepatitis E virus infection ---------------------------------------------------- Data from 14 countries reporting on the total number of hospitalizations related to HEV infection showed an increase from 85 hospitalized cases in 2005 to 1115 in 2015 (Figure 3). Most of this increase could be accounted for by 4 of the 5 countries that have conducted reporting on hospitalization status since at least 2005. Over the same time period, the proportion of cases being hospitalized has decreased from 80 percent (85/106 cases) to 55 percent (1115/2023 cases). Up to 12 countries provided data on deaths associated with HEV infection, with 5 countries recording these data since 2005. In total, 28 fatal cases were reported by 5 countries (Austria, Czech Republic, Germany, Hungary and Italy), increasing from 0-2 cases per year during 2005-2011 to 4-8 cases per year during 2012-2015. Travel history of diagnosed cases --------------------------------- Up to 15 countries provided data on travel history. Of hepatitis E cases reported in these countries during the period 2005-2015, 87 percent (13 511/15 525) were autochthonous (defined as locally acquired within the reporting country). The proportion of known autochthonous cases increased from 45-73 percent per year during 2006-2011 to 89-97 percent per year during 2012-2015. This suggests that the considerable increase in confirmed cases observed after 2011 (Figures 2 and 4) can largely be accounted for by locally acquired infection. A very small number of cases per year (9-36 cases) were known to be associated with travel outside of the EU/EEA. Discussion ---------- This study assessed testing policy and practice, laboratory diagnosis, and surveillance systems and activities for HEV infection in 31 EU/EEA countries. Up to 30 of the countries responded to the survey, providing the most comprehensive picture to date of HEV as an emerging infection among humans in Europe. The 10-fold increase in the number of cases reported between 2005 and 2015, more than 21 000 confirmed cases overall and a total of 28 deaths, underline the relevance and emerging nature of this zoonotic infection in Europe. The survey findings demonstrate a varied response to hepatitis E across EU/EEA countries; while 2 3rds of countries have established surveillance systems, a 3rd of countries have no specific surveillance and no plans to develop any. For those with existing surveillance, nearly one 3rd do not apply a case definition for HEV infection nationally. Only 19 countries reported that they were able to conduct HEV RNA testing in-country, although there may be testing within hospitals or private settings that the national public health institutes or survey respondents are unaware of. In most countries, it was not possible to ascertain the criteria for referral or for HEV test requests. While there may be an increasing awareness of locally acquired HEV infections, there is still concern that within parts of the clinical community, HEV is not considered as a possible cause of hepatitis unless there is a recent history of travel. It is therefore likely that the infection remains under-diagnosed. There also appears to be a gap in knowledge around the testing protocols used in outpatient and hospital settings within countries, which should be investigated further to understand when, who, and why patients are tested for HEV. Up to 22 countries (comprising more than\u200990 percent of the total EU/EEA population) were able to provide data on confirmed cases for at least some of the period 2005-2015. These data demonstrate that the number of reported cases has been increasing year-on-year, with a more than threefold increase between 2011 and 2015. The majority of cases were reported by 3 countries (the UK, France and Germany) that have had surveillance systems in place since at least 2005. A small number of countries reported changes to surveillance systems during the study period; for example, Belgium created a national reference centre for HEV in 2011 and Portugal commenced web-based notification in 2014. However, there were no changes that could have contributed substantially to the increase in the number of confirmed cases. A greater awareness of and increased testing for HEV, particularly of patients presenting with acute hepatitis by general practitioners in outpatient settings, is likely to be one of the contributing factors e.g. through the inclusion of HEV in some standard diagnostic protocols. The rise in the number of symptomatic cases might also be related to the switch in virus subtypes that has been observed in some EU/EEA countries [7,21]. The concurrent increase in number of hospitalizations (a measure of increased HEV infection severity) and gradual decrease in proportion of total cases hospitalized between 2005 and 2015 may suggest better outpatient diagnosis and an increase in the sensitivity of the diagnostic system, i.e. a change in testing practice from hospitals to community settings. For cases where clinical information was recorded, every second case was admitted to hospital and there were 2 to 8 deaths associated with HEV infection annually during 2011-2015. These figures appear high for a disease that has previously been considered to be a mild self-limiting infection [22]. However, a testing bias and overestimation of the hospitalization rate can be assumed because of a higher likelihood that cases of severe liver disease or other comorbidities are tested for HEV. Notably, only 4 countries were able to provide data on morbidity status since 2005 and only 5 were able to provide data on case fatality since 2005, although nearly half of the EU/EEA countries indicated that they are able to collect this information as of 2015. More data are needed to address the lack of knowledge in this area. As our results show, the number and proportion of autochthonous HEV infections has been increasing since 2005. Only a very small number of cases were known to be related to travel outside of the EU/EEA. Although genotype data were not requested from countries, it is known that autochthonous cases tend to be due to HEV genotype 3, the same genotype present in European pigs and consumed pork products; travel-related cases would be expected to be infected with genotype 1 or 4 [2-5]. Lately, there appears to have been a change in circulating subtypes in Europe. For example, the number of subtype 3c recently exceeded the numbers of subtypes 3e, f and g in humans in England and Wales [21]. Such changes may be contributing to the emergence of HEV as an important infection in humans. Changes in the pattern of food preparation and consumption may also be implicated. A case-control study in England and Wales identified pork sausages and ham purchased in supermarkets as possible sources of infection, raising concerns about whether current practice in preparing these products is sufficient to prevent HEV infection [23]. More studies among humans, animal populations and on food are essential to informing on possible sources of HEV infection. The main limitations of this study are the variation in the denominator data for reported cases of hepatitis E (most countries were only able to provide a subset of demographic information or a limited number of years of data) and the merging of data on reported cases of hepatitis E despite the different case definitions and testing approaches used by EU/EEA countries. These limitations have in part been addressed by showing data by year of surveillance introduction and by limiting the denominator to cases where the relevant information was known. The varying number of countries providing data inconsistently over the study period prompted us not to perform any trend analysis to avoid further introduction of bias. In the future these limitations could be addressed by standardization of surveillance systems for HEV infection, harmonization of the case definition as well as testing algorithms across EU/EEA countries. This would enable better assessment of the burden of disease due to HEV in Europe and facilitate a better understanding of the actual number of performed tests or population coverage as a denominator, thus avoiding diagnostic and surveillance artefacts. In summary, EU/EEA countries are at different stages in their surveillance and testing capacity for HEV, and there is no standardized European case definition. For the time period 2005-2015, at least 22 countries were able to report on cases infected with HEV, either through formal surveillance or existing systems of laboratory notifications. WHO's global health sector strategy on viral hepatitis asks countries to establish surveillance for viral hepatitis, particularly in blood donors [24]. Our study describes the availability of general hepatitis E surveillance in most EU/EEA countries. These data demonstrate a Europe-wide increase in reported cases, as well as a high number of reported HEV-related hospitalizations and a total of 28 deaths, between 2005 and 2015. They also provide a better understanding of the epidemiology and burden of HEV as an emerging cause of liver-related morbidity in EU/EEA countries. References [see original URL - Mod.LL] [Authors: Aspinall EJ, Couturier E, Faber M, et al] -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail [This important study clearly underscores the importance of zoonotic hepatitis E (primarily genotype 3) as the cause of hepatitis E emergence in Europe. There are currently 7 genotypes of HEV and genotypes 1 and 2 are not zoonotic and cause most of the HEV infections in Africa and Asia. It is these genotypes that cause increased morbidity and mortality in pregnant women. Most of the zoonotic hepatitis E cases have been recognized in the developed world, are associated with foodborne disease (usually undercooked pork products) and are caused by genotype 3. Additionally, infection with genotype 3 when occurring in immunocompromised hosts (especially solid organ transplant recipients) can cause chronic infection which can progress to cirrhosis. Ribavirin has been used to treat such individuals with chronic infection. - Mod.LL A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  .] [", "SALMONELLOSIS, SEROTYPE ANATUM - USA: IMPORTED HOT PEPPERS, 2016 **************************************************************** A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Thu 29 Jun 2017 Source: MMWR 66(25);663-667 [edited] Multistate Outbreak of _Salmonella_ Anatum Infections Linked to Imported Hot Peppers -- United States, May-July 2016 -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- Foodborne salmonellosis causes an estimated one million illnesses and 400 deaths annually in the USA (1). _Salmonella [enterica_ serotype] Anatum is one of the top 20 Salmonella serotypes in the USA. During 2013-2015 there were approximately 300-350 annual illnesses reported to PulseNet, the national molecular subtyping network for foodborne disease surveillance. In June 2016, PulseNet identified a cluster of 16 _S._ Anatum infections with an indistinguishable pulsed-field gel electrophoresis (PFGE) pattern from 4 states. In April 2016, the same PFGE pattern had been uploaded to PulseNet from an isolate obtained from an Anaheim pepper, a mild to medium hot pepper. Hot peppers include many pepper varieties, such as Anaheim, jalape\u00f1o, poblano, and serrano, which can vary in heat level from mild to very hot depending on the variety and preparation. This rare PFGE pattern had been seen only 24 times previously in the PulseNet database, compared with common PFGE patterns for this serotype which have been seen in the database hundreds of times. Local and state health departments, CDC, and the FDA investigated to determine the cause of the outbreak. A total of 32 patients in (states were identified with illness onsets from 6 May 2016 - 9 Jul 2016. Whole-genome sequencing (WGS) was performed to characterize clinical isolates and the Anaheim pepper isolate further. The combined evidence indicated that fresh hot peppers were the likely source of infection; however, a single pepper type or source farm was not identified. This outbreak highlights challenges in reconciling epidemiologic and WGS data, and the difficulties of identifying ingredient-level exposures through epidemiologic investigations alone. Epidemiologic Investigation --------------------------- During June [2017], local and state health departments in 7 states interviewed patients with standard foodborne illness questionnaires. By [Thu 29 Jun 2017], 14 patients had been interviewed; commonly reported foods eaten in the week preceding illness included tomatoes (71 percent of respondents); pork (64 percent); avocado/guacamole (57 percent); jalape\u00f1os, a hot pepper that can vary from mild to hot heat (36 percent); and cantaloupe (36 percent). These exposures were compared with the 2006-2007 FoodNet Population Survey, which summarizes data on foods eaten by a sample of healthy persons ( ). The only food exposure reported significantly more frequently than expected among patients was avocado/guacamole (p = 0.01); however, because the FoodNet Population Survey does not include questions on jalape\u00f1os, it was not possible to make a comparison for that exposure. Up to 7 of the 14 interviewed patients reported eating at Mexican-style restaurants in the week preceding illness onset. The lack of a strong hypothesis for the outbreak source led CDC to propose open-ended interviews by a single interviewer. Open-ended interviews are unstructured, conversational interviews that sometimes identify uncommon exposures because they gather more detailed information than that typically obtained from standard interviews ( ). CDC completed open-ended interviews with 9 patients, including 7 from Texas, one from Colorado, and one from Illinois. Concurrently, Minnesota investigators conducted open-ended interviews with 8 patients in Minnesota and shared exposure information with CDC. A case of Salmonella Anatum gastroenteritis was defined as infection with an outbreak strain of Salmonella Anatum in a person with onset of diarrheal illness during May 6-July 9, 2016. In total, 32 cases from 9 states were identified (Georgia (one case), Illinois (2), Kansas (1), Louisiana (1), Minnesota (10), Ohio (1), Oklahoma (1), Pennsylvania (1), Texas (13)) (Figure 1 - for Figures, see original URL - Mod.LL). The median patient age was 36 years (range = 4-79 years); 19 (59 percent) were female. Illness onset dates ranged from 6 May 2016 to 9 Jul 2016 (Figure 2). Among 25 patients for whom information on hospitalization was available, 8 (32 percent) were hospitalized; no deaths were reported. Among 18 patients for whom information from initial or open-ended interviews was available, 14 reported eating, or possibly eating fresh hot peppers, or reported eating an item containing fresh hot peppers. 9 patients reported eating peppers at restaurants, 2 reported eating peppers both at restaurants and at home, and 3 did not specify a location. Among the 14 patients who had eaten peppers, 11 reported eating, or possibly eating jalape\u00f1os. No patient reported eating Anaheim peppers; most had never heard of an Anaheim pepper. One illness subcluster was identified consisting of 2 patients who did not know one another and ate at the same Mexican-style restaurant in Texas in the week preceding illness. Both dined there on the same day and consumed multiple common food items, including steak, eggs, rice, beans, mild salsa, and pico de gallo (a fresh salsa made with chopped tomatoes), hot peppers, and other fresh ingredients. The only fresh hot peppers included in reported meal items were jalape\u00f1os, used in both the pico de gallo and mild salsa. The restaurant used serrano and poblano peppers in other dishes, but neither patient reported eating these items. Because the epidemiologic evidence supported hot peppers in general, but not Anaheim peppers specifically, investigators explored multiple hot pepper types as possible outbreak vehicles. Traceback Investigation ----------------------- Local and state investigators visited restaurants where patients reported consuming peppers. They collected recipes for reported menu items, including salsa, and reviewed invoices to identify common ingredients. To identify the source of hot peppers, FDA conducted traceback (the process of tracing a food from point-of-service to its origin or manufacturer source) from 3 restaurants in Minnesota and Texas where patients reported eating. Two of the 3 restaurants received peppers from a consolidator/grower in Mexico (consolidator/grower B) (Figure 3), which exported Anaheim peppers to the USA in April 2016. Consolidators pool foods from different growers or growing locations; this designation is also used if some growers/growing locations are unknown ( ). The 3rd restaurant received peppers from various firms in Mexico; however, this restaurant had received peppers from consolidator/grower B before this outbreak. Because of the complicated supply chain for peppers and the extensive mixing of peppers from different suppliers, repacking, and reselling of product, FDA was unable to identify a single source farm or point of contamination for peppers. In April 2016, before the identification of cases and as part of routine surveillance cultures of produce, the FDA isolated this strain of _S._ Anatum from an Anaheim pepper sample. This Anaheim pepper was collected from consolidator/grower B, which supplied 2 restaurants reported to have been visited by patients in this outbreak. FDA collected 7 additional samples of hot peppers, including serrano, habanero, jalape\u00f1o, and bell peppers, from consolidator/grower B as part of the outbreak investigation; none yielded Salmonella. Laboratory Investigation ------------------------ Representative clinical isolates and the Anaheim pepper isolate were further characterized by WGS ( ). High-quality single-nucleotide polymorphism (hqSNP) analysis indicated that 19 clinical isolates and the Anaheim pepper isolate differed by 0-3 hqSNPs, suggesting they were highly related genetically. This strong laboratory evidence was key to aiding in interpretation of the epidemiologic data. Public Health Response ---------------------- On 21 Jun 2016, before the epidemiologic investigation began, FDA placed consolidator/grower B on import alert for Anaheim peppers because they could be contaminated with salmonellae. (A product under an import alert is held at the port of entry before being allowed to enter the country. The importer must provide FDA evidence that the product is free from salmonellae within 10 business days of detention of the product; otherwise, the product cannot be imported.) There were only 2 outbreak-associated illnesses reported after the import alert was issued. Discussion ---------- In this outbreak, the only food sample yielding salmonellae matching the outbreak strain was an Anaheim pepper, which patients did not report consuming, perhaps because they were unfamiliar with this pepper variety or could not identify the pepper variety they consumed at restaurants in salsas or other dishes with chopped peppers. Although only 2 of the 3 restaurants included in the informational traceback investigation received peppers from the same consolidator/grower, it is possible that contaminated peppers cross-contaminated other foods or materials along the supply chain, providing a mechanism for the outbreak strain to reach the 3rd restaurant. In addition, it is possible that the 3rd restaurant did receive contaminated peppers during the outbreak timeframe, but the traceback was unable to uncover this because the companies involved kept incomplete records. However, no observations were made to support or refute either of these hypotheses. The strong genetic relationship between the clinical and food isolates, in combination with the epidemiologic and traceback evidence, indicated that fresh hot peppers were the likely source of the outbreak. Nevertheless, it was not possible to implicate one pepper type or source farm. The epidemiologic investigation relied on review of restaurant-specific recipes, because pepper varieties were difficult to identify when used as ingredients in foods, particularly when prepared at restaurants. In addition, because many common ingredients are consumed in Mexican-style meals, it was difficult to narrow a hypothesis based on epidemiologic information alone. Similar challenges were documented in previous investigations, including a 2008 Salmonella Saintpaul outbreak that sickened 1500 people; investigators ultimately determined that both fresh jalape\u00f1o and serrano peppers were outbreak sources after initial evidence indicated tomatoes might have been the source (2). This outbreak highlights the importance of preventing produce contamination to reduce the risk for foodborne illness, especially for foods that are often consumed raw. Many patients consumed peppers at restaurants, often in dishes like fresh salsa, which are served raw. A 2009 study of salmonellae in fresh salsa found that chopped jalape\u00f1os were more supportive of growth than some other raw vegetable ingredients when stored at 53\u00b0F-69\u00b0F (12\u00b0C-21\u00b0C) (3). Survival and growth varied with salsa formulation and were inhibited only in recipes containing both fresh garlic and lime juice (3); further research is needed to assess the microbiologic effects of these formulations. For all recipes, no growth was detected at 39\u00b0F (4\u00b0C ), underscoring the importance of proper temperature controls at restaurants (3). All fresh produce, including hot peppers, should be thoroughly washed before preparation and consumption, and refrigerated as soon as possible to prevent the proliferation of bacteria such as salmonellae. This outbreak also highlights new challenges in outbreak investigations when trying to reconcile epidemiologic data with WGS results indicating that clinical and food isolates are genetically closely related to one another. Although WGS can provide additional resolution of the relatedness of isolates, it should not be used as the sole source of evidence (4). Careful review of all available epidemiologic, traceback, and laboratory data is critical to determining the source of foodborne outbreaks as enhanced molecular techniques are implemented. References ---------- 1. Scallan E, Hoekstra RM, Angulo FJ, et al: Foodborne illness acquired in the United States--major pathogens. Emerg Infect Dis 2011;17: 7-15. 2. Barton Behravesh C, Mody RK, Jungk J, et al: Salmonella Saintpaul Outbreak Investigation Team. 2008 outbreak of Salmonella Saintpaul infections associated with raw produce. N Engl J Med 2011;364: 918-927. 3. Ma L, Zhang G, Gerner-Smidt P, Tauxe RV, Doyle MP: Survival and growth of Salmonella in salsa and related ingredients. J Food Prot 2010;73: 434-44. 4. Leekitcharoenphon P, Nielsen EM, Kaas RS, Lund O, Aarestrup FM: Evaluation of whole genome sequencing for outbreak detection of Salmonella enterica. PLoS One 2014;9:e87991. [Authors: Hassan R, Rounds J, Sorenson A, et al] -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail [The vehicles transmitting the infection were likely food in which the hot pepper was served uncooked or foods with uncooked ingredients that were cross-contaminated by the hot peppers. For non-aficionados of hot peppers, the \"heat\" of hot peppers is measured by the Scoville scale. The Scoville scale ( ) is a measurement of the pungency (spicy heat) of chili peppers, or other spicy foods as reported in Scoville heat units (SHU), a function of capsaicin concentration. Capsaicin is one of many related chemicals, collectively called capsaicinoids. The scale is named after its creator, American pharmacist Wilbur Scoville. His method, devised in 1912, is known as the Scoville Organoleptic Test. Unlike methods based on high-performance liquid chromatography, the Scoville scale is a subjective measurement dependent on the capsaicin sensitivity of testers and so is not a precise or accurate method to measure capsaicinoid concentration. A table (from the same URL) reflecting peppers and their SHUs is: 855 000 - 2 480 000: Dragon's Breath, Carolina Reaper, Komodo Dragon Chili Pepper, Trinidad Moruga Scorpion, Naga Viper pepper, Infinity Chili, Naga Morich, Bhut jolokia (ghost pepper), Trinidad Scorpion Butch T pepper, Bedfordshire Super Naga, Spanish Naga Chili, 350 000 - 580 000: Red Savina habanero 100 000 - 350 000: Habanero chili, Scotch bonnet pepper Datil pepper, Rocoto, Madame Jeanette, Peruvian White Habanero, Jamaican hot pepper, Fatalii Wiri Wiri, Bird's eye chili 50 000 - 100 000: Malagueta pepper, Chiltepin pepper, Piri piri, Pequin pepper, Siling Labuyo, Capsicum Apache 30 000 - 50 000: Guntur chilli, Cayenne pepper, Aj\u00ed pepper, Tabasco pepper, Capsicum chinense 10 000 - 30 000: Byadgi chilli, Serrano pepper, Peter pepper, Chile de \u00e1rbol, Aleppo pepper, Cheongyang chili pepper, Peperoncino 3500 - 10 000: Guajillo pepper, 'Fresno Chili' pepper, Jalape\u00f1o, wax (e.g. Hungarian wax pepper) 1000 - 3500: Anaheim pepper, Pasilla pepper, Peppadew, Poblano (or Ancho), Poblano verde, Rocotillo pepper, Espelette pepper 100 - 1000: Banana pepper, Cubanelle, Paprika, Pimento 0: Bell pepper Since most of those interviewed for the study did not know what an Anaheim pepper looks like (it is commonly sold at neighborhood grocery stores with Cubanelles, Banana peppers, Jalape\u00f1os, Serranos and Scotch bonnets, the picture of the Anaheim pepper can be found at:  . - Mod.LL A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  .] [", "HEPATITIS B AND C - USA (02): (VIRGINIA) INJECTION DRUG USE *********************************************************** A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Wed 28 Jun 2017 02:17 PM EDT Source: WCYB [edited] Southwest Virginia health officials continue to see increases in hepatitis C linked to drug abuse in the region. That issue leaves community leaders looking at new options to combat the consequences of the epidemic. There continues to be growing concerns that the drug abuse problem in southwest Virginia opens the region up to blood-borne pathogens, like hepatitis B and C, as well as HIV. Alice Asher is an epidemiologist for the CDC based in Atlanta. She said rural communities are beginning to report increased cases of hepatitis C, which is an infectious disease transmitted through contact with blood. \"We're just seeing communities that really didn't have hepatitis C are reporting large portions of their populations getting it. Again, it goes back to the opioid use epidemic,\" Asher said. It has been a continuing problem. In 2015, the Lenowisco Health District, consisting of Lee, Wise, and Scott Counties, a region that only makes up about 1.1 percent of Virginia's population had about 33 percent of the state's recorded hepatitis B cases. Today [Wed 28 Jun2017]; the region continues to record cases at a rate higher than the state average. It is especially concerning to health officials because this area has a storage of doctors to treat infectious diseases. Dr Sue Cantrell said there are a few located in the Tri-Cities area or Roanoke Valley, but many people who need the services do not have the transportation to get there. Right now, they are using telemedicine services through the University of Virginia. Cantrell serves as the district health director for Lenowisco and is the acting director for the Cumberland Plateau district. \"We really feel like there is a need for primary care doctors to become competent and confident that they can provide good care for people with hepatitis C,\" she said. For many of these reasons, health leaders are now trying to create an emergency response plan to be ready should the numbers increase rapidly. One consideration is to institute syringe service problems where those using IV drugs can exchange dirty needles for clean ones. A new law set to go into effect on [Sat 1 Jul 2017], makes the option legal in Virginia. \"One of the really important components of a well-run syringe service program is offering ongoing screening for hepatitis B, hepatitis C and HIV are identified as having those infections can take steps to either get treated and reduce their risk of spreading those infections to other people,\" Cantrell said. All southwest Virginia counties are eligible for the program. [Byline: Olivia Bailey] -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts [Hepatitis B can be prevented by a vaccine that has been available in the USA since 1982 and has been part of universal immunization in childhood for most of that time. It would be interesting to know the age range and immunization history of the acute HBV cases. Most cases of acute hepatitis C are not recognized or reported because they are asymptomatic or anicteric (without jaundice) so the case numbers are likely underreported. In the absence of a vaccine for hepatitis C (as are available for hepatitis A and B), infection avoidance techniques such as needle exchange programs and the need for aggressive available programs in counseling, not criminalizing, substance addiction are vitally needed. There is no evidence that government sponsored needle exchange programs increase the amount of substance abuse. - Mod.LL A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  .] [", "LASSA FEVER - WEST AFRICA (25): NIGERIA **************************************** A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Fri 23 Jun 2017 Source: Nigeria Centre for Disease Control [NCDC] Weekly Epidemiological Report 7(23) [edited] 1. Lassa fever Please note that the data reflects the routine reports i.e. all suspected cases including the laboratory positive and negative cases 1.1. Up to 3 suspected cases of Lassa fever with one Laboratory confirmed were reported from two LGAs (Anambra and Ogun States) in week 23, 2017 compared with zero case at the same period in 2016. 1.2. Laboratory results of the 3 suspected cases were one positive (Anambra - 1) and 2 negatives (Ogun - 2). 1.3. Between weeks 1 and 23 (2017), 301 suspected Lassa fever cases with 65 laboratory confirmed cases and 49 deaths (CFR, 16.28 percent) from 60 LGAs (22 States) were reported compared with 717 suspected cases with 71 laboratory confirmed cases and 87 deaths (CFR, 12.15 percent) from 125 LGAs (27 States) during the same period in 2016 (Figure 1). 1.4. Between weeks 1 and 52 2016, 921 suspected Lassa fever cases with 109 laboratory confirmed cases and 119 deaths (CFR, 12.92 percent) from 144 LGAs (28 States and FCT) were reported compared with 430 suspected cases with 25 laboratory confirmed cases and 40 deaths (CFR, 9.30 percent) from 37 LGAs (14 States and FCT) during the same period in 2015 (Figure 2). 1.5. Investigation and active case search ongoing in affected States with coordination of response activities by the NCDC with support from partners. 1.5.1. National Lassa Fever Working Group meeting and weekly National Surveillance and Outbreak Response meeting on-going at NCDC to keep abreast of the current Lassa fever situation in the country. 1.5.2. Response materials for VHFs prepositioned across the country by NCDC at the beginning of the dry season 1.5.3. New VHF guidelines have been developed by the NCDC (Interim National Viral Haemorrhagic Fevers Preparedness guidelines and Standard Operating Procedures for Lassa fever management) 1.5.4. Ongoing reclassification of reported Lassa fever cases 1.5.5. Ongoing review of the variables for case-based surveillance for VHF 1.5.6. VHF case-based forms completed by affected States are being entered into the new VHF management system. This system allows for the creation of a VHF database for the country. 1.5.7. NCDC team sent to Edo State to support Lassa fever data harmonization and updating of VHF case-based management database 1.5.8. Confirmed cases are being treated at identified treatment/isolation centers across the States with Ribavirin and necessary supportive management also instituted 1.5.9. Onsite support was earlier provided to Ogun, Nasarawa, Taraba, Ondo and Borno States by the NCDC and partners 1.5.10. Offsite support provided by NCDC/partners in all affected States 1.5.11. States are enjoined to intensify surveillance and promote Infection, Prevention and Control (IPC) measures in health facilities. Table of cases as of 16 Jun 2017 Cases during week 23: 3 cases, deaths 0 Cumulative weeks 1- 23: 301, deaths 49 [Cases by state not given in thei Epidemiological Report] -- Communicated by: Olutayo Olajide Babalobi Lecturer and Consultant Epizootiologist (One Health, Participatory Epizootiology and Veterinary ICT Research Group) Department of Veterinary Public Health and Preventive Medicine Faculty of Veterinary Medicine University of Ibadan Ibadan, Nigeria [During week 23, there were just 3 new suspected cases. As noted in earlier comments, Lassa fever remains a problem in Nigeria because the virus is endemic there. Virus transmission to humans occurs when people are in contact with the reservoir rodent host, the multimammate mouse (in the genus _Mastomys_) or their excreta. Transmission also occurs in health facilities when personal protective equipment is not employed and barrier nursing practices are not adequate to protect staff from blood and secretions of infected patients. Images of _Mastomys_ mice, the rodent reservoir of Lass fever virus, can be seen at . Once again, Dr Olutayo Olajide Babalobi is thanked for sending in the above Epidemiological Report. Maps of Nigeria can be accessed at  and  . - Mod.TY A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  .] [", "HEPATITIS A - USA (11): (CALIFORNIA) ************************************ A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Wed 28 Jun 2017 Source: KPBS [edited] There is no sign San Diego County's hepatitis A outbreak is slowing down anytime soon. According to a new report by the San Diego County Health and Human Services Agency, there are now 196 confirmed cases of the viral disease, 142 hospitalizations and 4 deaths, making this the largest hepatitis A outbreak in California in more than 2 decades and the 3rd largest in the nation since the hepatitis A vaccine was introduced in the late 1990s. The overwhelming majority of the people affected are either homeless, drug users, or both. The outbreak has forced health officials to resort to unconventional methods. They include sending out teams of nurses with backpacks and coolers to encampments, where they offer vaccinations. The county is also planning to install hand-washing stations in downtown San Diego and elsewhere to try to help prevent the spread of the disease. Hepatitis A is spread through close contact and fecal contamination, and it leads to symptoms like nausea and jaundice. County health officials expect the number of cases to continue to climb as dozens of suspected cases could soon be confirmed. There has been no confirmed source of the outbreak. [Byline: Marissa Cabrera and Maureen Cavanaugh] -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail [The number of cases of diagnosed hepatitis A in San Diego County in southern California continues to increase, now over an almost 7 month period. Date / Cases / Hospitalized (percentage) / Deaths (percentage) -------------------------------------------------------------- 5 Apr 2017 / 39 / 33 (85) / 1 (3) 4 May 2017 / 80 / 66 (83) / 3 (4) 31 May 2017 / 133 / 103 (80) / 3 (2) 12 Jun 2017 / 160 / 120 (75) / 4 (2.5) 27 Jun 2017 / 196 / 142 (72) / 4 (2) There have been 63 more cases over about 4 weeks and 116 more cases over about 8 weeks. Since many cases of HAV infection are asymptomatic or anicteric (without jaundice), the total number of cases is likely to have been significantly higher. It is not clear if the newer cases are truly new or just newly reported older cases. An epidemiologic curve showing the date of onset of symptoms of cases over time could assist in this regard. Thus, it remains unclear if the persistent increase is related to slow reporting, increased awareness and testing, secondary cases, or the persistent source or sources in the environment. The very high hospitalization rate may be related to the homelessness of the cohort but could represent a more virulent strain. HAV infection occurred in some individuals chronically infected with either hepatitis B or C, but it is not clear if the fatalities occurred in those individuals. Homelessness and illicit substance use seem to be relevant risk factors while homosexual practices is not. It remains unclear how and from what vehicle the virus is spreading. - Mod.LL The state of California can be located on the HealthMap/ProMED-mail interactive map at . San Diego County can be seen on the map at  . A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  .] [", "CHRONIC WASTING DISEASE, CERVID - USA (08): COMMENT *************************************************** A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Thu 29 Jun 2017 From: Merritt Clifton [edited] Apart from the question of whether the burning temperature will be anywhere near the temperature required to destroy prions, this whole exercise looks suspiciously like a traditional strategy for increasing the deer population for the benefit of hunters. That the theory behind it is emerging from Colorado is particularly odd in view of the Colorado experience with both wildfires and CWD over the past 40 years. The wildfire history of Colorado over this time is documented here: CWD was 1st identified in Colorado in 1967, the year after what was then a record wildfire year for the state, with 673 fires burning 7361 acres. Since then, the average number of wildfires and acres burned per year have increased steadily, to an AVERAGE of 2973 fires and 41 430 acres burned per year in 2000-2009, while CWD has run amok throughout Colorado and spread to many other states, chiefly with elk transports among hunting ranches. Fires, at the very least, have failed to control the spread of CWD. Not only that, while correlation does not imply causation, fires may have accelerated the spread. This could have occurred, for example, by possibly causing infected herds in fire zones to migrate into proximity to other herds, and then by attracting uninfected herds into regrowth areas shared with infected animals. If prionic disease researcher Mark Zabel is correct in his theory that deer and elk become infected chiefly by ingesting prions taken up by plants, either wildfires or controlled burns may have stimulated the ingestion of prions by stimulating the new growth that deer most like to eat. Please note that setting fires to promote the regrowth that deer favor is a tactic practiced since pre-Columbian times, and was a staple of wildlife management during the several decades (1950s through 1990s) when state agencies typically tried to boost the deer population to as much as a 3rd above overwintering carrying capacity, to accommodate hunters and encourage license sales. This approach fell out of vogue among many and perhaps most state agencies circa 2000 because of the growing perception that having too many deer was/is a traffic hazard, inhibits the growth of the biggest bucks, and harms bird habitat, and -- most of all -- because of increasing concern about \"controlled\" fires becoming wildfires, as happens more and more in the ever-dryer forests of much of North America. In response, however, private property owners who hunt or lease land for hunting have over the past 15 years or so formed many \"controlled burn groups\" to boost deer population. Under pressure to stop controlled burns, chiefly as a fire hazard, these people have been casting about left and right for pretexts to continue, including tick control, control of \"noxious\" weeds and non-native plants, etc. Since prescribed burns will tend to increase the deer population willy-nilly, since most of the burning is highly unlikely to destroy prions, and since more deer tend to increase the risk of infectious disease transmission (even if the transmission only occurs through cervid practices such as gnawing bones for calcium), this whole exercise looks more like a prescription for spreading CWD than a prescription for actually controlling it. -- Merritt Clifton Editor POB 101, Greenbank, WA 98253 [Fair comment. If fires are to help control CWD maybe their preferred site would be on deer breeding farms with good security. Thus quarantined deer could be moved to \"clean\" pasture while the \"contaminated\" pasture is burnt. And the boundary fencing is high enough to prevent the breeding deer from escaping and the wild deer to gain entry. - Mod.MHJ A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  .] [", "EBOLA UPDATE (30): NEWS, RESEARCH, NON-GOVERNMENTAL ORGANIZATION, VACCINES *************************************************************************** A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases In this update: [1] News DR Congo border DR Congo death Liberia [2] Research Zoonotic spillovers Clinical laboratory values [3] Non-Government Organizations Role in W African Ebola outbreak [4] Vaccines rVSV (delta)G-ZEBOV-GP Ad26.ZEBOV and MVA-BN-Filo ****** [1] News 21 Jun 2017 Democratic Republic of Congo: Tombura reopens border with Congo as Ebola rates decrease [Tombura State has officially reopened its border with neighboring Democratic Republic of Congo [DRC] after several weeks of closure due to reports of [Ebola virus disease (EVD)] infections in DRC, a local official said. Speaking to Radio Tamazuj on [Tue 20 Jun 2017], Deputy Governor of Tombura State, Lino Utu said the border is now open to allow free movement of people and goods. Utu explained that the state government decided to reopen the common border after the situation had returned to normal in Congo. However, he said precautionary measures, which include surveillance and screening of people crossing into South Sudan, are still in place.] 22 Jun 2017 DR Congo: WHO confirms death of 4th patient in DR Congo [A 4th person has died in an [Ebola virus disease (EVD)] outbreak in the Democratic Republic of Congo, a spokesman from the World Health Organization (WHO) said on Mon 22 May. Since the WHO declared the outbreak on 12 May in north-eastern Bas-Uele province, 37 suspected cases are being monitored, WHO's Eugene Kabambi said. Of these suspected cases, 2 were confirmed in the laboratory and 3 were regarded as probable [EVD] cases, Kabambi said. Community health agents are monitoring 400 people who may have come into contact with those killed by the [viral disease]. \"People who were in contact with the 1st case reported on [22 April 2017] came out unscathed after the 21 days of observation,\" Kabambi said. The Democratic Republic of the Congo has suffered 7 previous outbreaks of [EVD] since the [viral disease] was discovered in the country in 1976. The last outbreak, in 2014, left 49 people dead. West Africa was worst affected during 2014 [outbreak], with the hemorrhagic fever claiming more than 11 000 lives, most of those in Guinea, Liberia and Sierra Leone.] [This case does not appear to represent further spread of the virus, but rather one of the cases being monitored. - Mod.LK] 25 Jun 2017 Liberia: MOH issues alert as strange disease emerges in Liberia [The Ministry of Health (MOH) has directed all agencies under its jurisdiction to increase surveillance at all health facilities following an emergence of what it described as a \"strange\" disease in Liberia. A memo issued to all concerned agencies of the ministry said the Ministry of the Interior had advised the MOH to increase disease surveillance at all levels of the national health system to prevent the spread of the strange disease. The Interior Ministry has underscored the need to promote infection prevention and control mechanism at health facilities as part of preparations to prevent the spread of the unknown disease to Ghana through the borders and the airport. The disease, yet to be identified, according to the Ghana Immigration Service, has claimed 11 lives in Liberia while at least 9 more people have been infected by the disease. \"The symptoms reported by the victims mainly are headache, weakness, diarrhea, vomiting, mental confusion, abdominal pain and fever,\" the Ministry of the Interior has said. ...more] [Such non-specific symptoms could be caused by many etiologic agents. Any further information a ProMED reader may have is welcome. - Mod.LK] ****** [2] Research 21 Jun 2017: Scientists locate where the most deadly 'missing viruses' are hiding [Citation. Olival K.J., Hosseini C.Z-T, et al. (21 Jun 2017). Host and viral traits predict zoonotic spillover from mammals. Nature 2017. doi:10.1038/nature22975 Abstract. The majority of human emerging infectious diseases are zoonotic, with viruses that originate in wild mammals of particular concern (for example, HIV, Ebola and SARS). Understanding patterns of viral diversity in wildlife and determinants of successful cross-species transmission, or spillover, are therefore key goals for pandemic surveillance programs. However, few analytical tools exist to identify which host species are likely to harbour the next human virus, or which viruses can cross species boundaries. Here we conduct a comprehensive analysis of mammalian host-virus relationships and show that both the total number of viruses that infect a given species and the proportion likely to be zoonotic are predictable. After controlling for research effort, the proportion of zoonotic viruses per species is predicted by phylogenetic relatedness to humans, host taxonomy and human population within a species range--which may reflect human-wildlife contact. We demonstrate that bats harbour a significantly higher proportion of zoonotic viruses than all other mammalian orders. We also identify the taxa and geographic regions with the largest estimated number of 'missing viruses' and 'missing zoonoses' and therefore of highest value for future surveillance. We then show that phylogenetic host breadth and other viral traits are significant predictors of zoonotic potential, providing a novel framework to assess if a newly discovered mammalian virus could infect people.] [See full article and references in the Nature publication referred to above. - Mod.LK] July 2017. Clinical Laboratory Values as Early Indicators of Ebola Virus Infection in Nonhuman Primates [Citation. Reisler R.B., Donofrio M.J., Warren T.K., et al. Clinical Laboratory Values as Early Indicators of Ebola Virus Infection in Nonhuman Primates. Emerg Inf Dis. 23(8)--August 2017 Abstract. The Ebola virus (EBOV) outbreak in West Africa during 2013-2016 demonstrated the need to improve Ebola virus disease (EVD) diagnostics and standards of care. This retrospective study compared laboratory values and clinical features of 3 nonhuman primate models of lethal EVD to assess associations with improved survival time. In addition, the study identified laboratory values useful as predictors of survival, surrogates for EBOV viral loads, and triggers for initiation of therapeutic interventions in these nonhuman primate models. Furthermore, the data support that, in nonhuman primates, the Makona strain of EBOV may be less virulent than the Kikwit strain of EBOV. The applicability of these findings as potential diagnostic and management tools for EVD in humans warrants further investigation.] ****** [3] Non-governmental organization 17 Jun 2017. Non-government organizations and the fight Against Ebola: Identifying the types of aid most provided by non-Government organizations during the 2013-2015 Ebola crisis [Citation. Cook B. (17 Jun 2017). Non-government organizations and the fight against Ebola: Identifying the types of aid most provided by non-government organizations during the 2013-2015 Ebola crisis. Alleghany College. Abstract. The purpose of this project is to identify what was the most given type of aid by non-government organizations (NGOs) was in response to the 2013-2015 [Ebola virus disease (EVD)] outbreak in the countries of Sierra Leone, Liberia and Guinea. The types of aid were split into 20 separate categories. Data was collected on 67 NGOs who were listed on The Center for International Disaster Information's website. The actual data was retrieved from the websites and affiliate sites of the NGOs being examined. The format of the data was usually self-reported, and was in other varying formats depending on the organizations. The data was then put into a spreadsheet on Microsoft Excel for analysis. It was determined at the end of the study that providing community education to communities who were at risk of coming into contact with the virus, or who already had been affected by the virus, was the most frequently given type of aid by NGOs. Several other areas of aid that had large contributions of aid were training healthcare workers and providing personal protective equipment. Several patterns were also found within the community education data regarding how the community education was provided or supplemented. It was found that many NGOs also made use of pamphlets and radio messages to educate populations about the virus. ] ****** [4] Vaccines 19 Jun 2017: Ebola vaccine developed in Canada shows promising results [A phase 1 randomized controlled trial has found an Ebola virus disease (EVD) vaccine, developed in Canada, was well-tolerated with no safety concerns, and high antibodies were present in participants 6 months after immunization. The study, led by Canadian researchers, is published in CMAJ (Canadian Medical Association Journal): Citation. ElSherif M.S., Brown C., MacKinnon-Cameron M., et al. (19 Jun 2017) Assessing the safety and immunogenicity of recombinant vesicular stomatitis virus Ebola vaccine in healthy adults: a randomized clinical trial. CMAJ June 19, 2017. 189(24) doi: 10.1503/cmaj.170074 Abstract. --Background. The 2013-2016 Ebola virus [disease] outbreak in West Africa was the most widespread in history. In response, a live attenuated recombinant vesicular stomatitis virus (rVSV) vaccine expressing Zaire Ebolavirus glycoprotein (rVSV\u00ce\"G-ZEBOV-GP) was evaluated in humans. --Methods. In a phase 1, randomized, dose-ranging, observer-blind, placebo-controlled trial, healthy adults aged 18-65 years were randomized into 4 groups of 10 to receive one of 3 vaccine doses or placebo. Follow-up visits spanned 180 days post-vaccination for safety monitoring, immunogenicity testing and any rVSV virus shedding. --Results. Forty participants were injected with rVSV-deltaG-ZEBOV-GP vaccine (n = 30) or saline placebo (n = 10). No serious adverse events related to the vaccine or participant withdrawals were reported. Solicited adverse events during the 14-day follow-up period were mild to moderate and self-limited, with the exception of injection-site pain and headache. Viremia following vaccination was transient and no longer detectable after study day 3, with no virus shedding in saliva or urine. All vaccinated participants developed serum immunoglobulin G (IgG), as measured by Ebola virus envelope glycoprotein-based enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA). Immunogenicity was comparable across all dose groups, and sustained IgG titers were detectable through to the last visit, at study day 180. --Interpretation. In this phase 1 study, there were no safety concerns after a single dose of rVSV-deltaG-ZEBOV-GP vaccine. IgG ELISA showed persistent high titers at 180 days postimmunization. There was a period of reactogenicity, but in general, the vaccine was well tolerated. This study provides evidence of the safety and immunogenicity of rVSV-deltaG-ZEBOV-GP vaccine and importance of its further investigation.] 14 Mar 2017 Ebola vaccine has been shown to induce a durable immune response 1 year after vaccination [A prime-boost Ebola vaccine regime has induced a persistent antibody response of at least one year in 100 percent of the healthy volunteers. Partners behind the development of the vaccine include the EU's Innovative Medicines Initiative. Citation. Winslow R.L., Milligan I.D., Voysey M., et al. (14 Mar 2017) Immune Responses to Novel Adenovirus Type 26 and Modified Vaccinia Virus Ankara-Vectored Ebola Vaccines at 1 Year. JAMA. 2017;317(10):1075-1077. doi:10.1001/jama.2016.20644 Abstract. The Ebola virus vaccine strategies evaluated by the World Health Organization in response to the 2014-2016 outbreak in West Africa included a heterologous primary and booster vaccination schedule of the adenovirus type 26 vector vaccine encoding Ebola virus glycoprotein (Ad26.ZEBOV) and the modified vaccinia virus Ankara vector vaccine, encoding glycoproteins from Ebola, Sudan, Marburg, and Tai Forest viruses nucleoprotein (MVA-BN-Filo). This schedule has been shown to induce immune responses that persist for 8 months after primary immunization, with 100 percent of vaccine recipients retaining Ebola virus glycoprotein-specific antibodies.] -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail [compiled by: Celeste Whitlow ] [[A map of the affected area can be seen at  and a HealthMap/ProMED-mail map of the DRC at  . Maps of the 3 countries affected by the 2014 Ebola outbreak in W. Africa can be accessed at: Liberia Guinea Sierra Leone . - Mod.LK] ] [", "POLIOMYELITIS UPDATE (14): SYRIA (DEIR AL ZOUR), NEW CASES, CIRCULATING VACCINE DERIVED POLIOVIRUS, GLOBAL ********************************************************************************************************** A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases In this update: [1] Global update, Syria, new cases - GPEI/WHO [2] VDPV impact - media report [3] AFP private sector reporting challenges - Kuwait, media report ****** [1] Global update, Syria, new cases - GPEI Date: Thu 29 Jun 2017 Source: Global Polio Eradication Initiative Poliovirus Weekly Update 28-Jun-2017 New wild poliovirus cases reported this week: 0 Total number of wild poliovirus cases in 2017: 6 Total number of wild poliovirus cases in 2016: 37 New cVDPV cases reported this week: 5 Total number of cVDPV cases in 2017: 26 Total number of cVDPV cases in 2016: 5 Headlines - WHO Director-General Dr Margaret Chan retirement : GPEI offers sincere thanks for her ten-year leadership, which brought the world to the threshold of being polio-free. - Containment update: progress towards containment of poliovirus type 2 published . - \"Coffee with Polio Experts\": a short video-chat with Dr Ousmane Diop, Coordinator of the Global Polio Laboratory Network, on the increasingly important role of environmental surveillance to help track down every last poliovirus strain. - Summary of newly-reported viruses this week: Syria - 5 new circulating vaccine-derived poliovirus type 2 (cVDPV2) isolated from acute flaccid paralysis (AFP) cases. Pakistan - 1 new wild poliovirus type 1 (WPV1) positive environmental sample. Afghanistan - No new wild poliovirus type 1 (WPV1) cases were reported in the past week. The total number of WPV1 cases for 2017 remains four. The most recent WPV1 case had onset of paralysis on [16 Apr 2017] from Nawzad district, Hilmand province. - With most of Afghanistan polio-free, efforts are focused on continuing to strengthen operations, in close coordination with Pakistan, to address remaining low-level transmission in the common reservoir area of the Quetta-Kandahar corridor. - Afghanistan is carrying out a programme review focusing on the implementation of the National Emergency Action Plan and making necessary adjustments for the second half of 2017. - Polio eradication teams from East and South East Afghanistan and neighbouring FATA and Khyber Pakhtunkhwa in Pakistan met in Kabul on 24-25 May [2017] to review the current coordination mechanisms and agree on additional measures to further improve implementation in the WPV common reservoirs. Core teams from the National Emergency Operation Centres Afghanistan and Pakistan also met to discuss next steps on further improving the vaccination strategies for high risk mobile populations. Pakistan - No new wild poliovirus type 1 (WPV1) cases were reported in the past week. The total number of WPV1 cases for 2017 remains two. The most recent case had onset of paralysis on [13 Feb 2017], from Diamir district, Gilgit Baltistan. - One new WPV1 positive environmental sample was reported in the past week, from Karachi Gadap, Sindh, collected on [5 Jun 2017]. - The year 2016 saw the lowest ever annual number of polio cases in the country but poliovirus continues to be isolated through environmental surveillance over a significant geographical range. Efforts are ongoing through implementation of the national emergency action plan to address remaining gaps in coverage and surveillance, in close coordination with neighbouring Afghanistan. - The National Polio Management Team met on [8-9 Jun 2017] to review implementation of the National Emergency Action Plan during the low transmission season, and to agree on essential adjustments to the plan for the second half of 2017. Nigeria - No new cases of wild poliovirus type 1 (WPV1) were reported in the past week. The total number of WPV1 cases for 2016 remains 4 and no cases have been reported in 2017. The most recent case had onset of paralysis on [21 Aug 2016] in Monguno Local Government Area (LGA), Borno. - Nigeria continues to implement emergency response to the detected WPV1 strain and circulating vaccine-derived poliovirus type 2 (cVDPV2) strains affecting the country. - The response is part of a broader regional outbreak response, coordinated with neighbouring countries, in particular the Lake Chad sub-region, including northern Cameroon, parts of Central African Republic, Chad and southern Niger. - Detection of the polio cases in Nigeria underscores the risk posed by low-level undetected transmission and the urgent need to strengthen subnational surveillance. Lake Chad Basin - The detection of wild poliovirus type 1 (WPV1) and circulating vaccine-derived poliovirus type 2 (cVDPV2) in Nigeria poses a risk to the neighbouring countries of the Lake Chad basin and hence an outbreak response plan is being implemented as part of the response to the Nigeria outbreak. - Emergency outbreak response efforts continue across the Lake Chad basin, together with activities to fill subnational surveillance gaps across the region. Central Africa - No new cases were reported in the past week. The Democratic Republic of the Congo (DR Congo) is affected by 2 separate outbreaks of circulating vaccine derived poliovirus type 2 (cVDPV2), in Haut Lomami province (2 cases, with onset of paralysis on [8 Mar 2017 and 20 Feb 2017]); and in Maniema province (2 cases with onset of paralysis on [26 Mar 2017 and 18 Apr 2017], with an additional isolate detected in a healthy individual with sample collection on 2 May [2017]). - Outbreak response plans are currently being finalised, with supplementary immunization activities using monovalent oral polio vaccine type 2 (mOPV2) in line with internationally-agreed outbreak response protocols. - The 1st mOPV2 campaign is being implemented this week ([27-29 Jun 2017]) targeting more than 750 000 children under the age of 5 years in the 2 affected provinces. - Surveillance and immunization activities are being strengthened in neighbouring countries. - DR Congo is also affected by an Ebola outbreak, in Bas Uele province in the north of the country. Coordination among both outbreak response teams will be necessary and teams are already working on this. Syrian Arab Republic - In Syria, 5 new cases of circulating vaccine-derived poliovirus type 2 (cVDPV2) were reported in the past week, bringing the total of cVDPV2 cases to 22. All cases had onset of paralysis between [3 Mar 2017 and 25 May 2017]. 21 of the cases are from Mayadeen district, Deir-Al-Zour governorate, and 1 case is from Raqua district, Raqua governorate. - Confirmation of these latest cases is not unexpected at this time and does not change the operational situation, as outbreak response plans are being finalized, in line with internationally-agreed outbreak response protocols. Although access to Deir-Al-Zour is compromised due to insecurity, the Governorate has been partially reached by several vaccination campaigns against polio and other vaccine-preventable diseases since the beginning of 2016. Most recently, 2 campaigns have been conducted in March and April 2017 using the bivalent oral polio vaccine ([bOPV]). However, only limited coverage was possible through these campaigns. Officially reported wild poliovirus cases as of 20 Jun 2017 Total global cases in 2017: 6 (compared with 18 for the same period in 2016) Total in endemic countries in 2017: 6 (compared with 18 for the same period in 2016) Total in non-endemic countries in 2017: 0 (compared with 0 for the same period in 2016)  - Afghanistan: 4 cases in 2017 (compared with 6 for the same period in 2016), onset of paralysis of most recent case: 16-Apr-17  - Pakistan: 2 cases in 2017 (compared with 12 for the same period in 2016), onset of paralysis of most recent case: 13-Feb-17  - Nigeria: 0 case in 2017 (compared with 0 for the same period in 2016), onset of paralysis of most recent case: 21-Aug-16 - Total global cases in 2016: 37 \u00b7 Total in endemic countries: 37 \u00b7 Total in non-endemic countries: 0 Officially reported cVDPV cases as of 20 Jun 2017 Total global cases in 2017: 26 (compared with 3 for the same period in 2016)  - Syrian Arab Republic: 22 cases in 2017 (compared with 0 for the same period in 2016), onset of paralysis of most recent case: 25-May-17  - Democratic Republic of the Congo: 4 cases in 2017 (compared with 0 for the same period in 2016), onset of paralysis of most recent case: 18-Apr-17  - Pakistan: 0 case in 2017 (compared with 0 for the same period in 2016), onset of paralysis of most recent case: 17-Dec-16  - Nigeria: 0 case in 2017 (compared with 0 f or the same period in 2016), onset of paralysis of most recent case: 28-Oct-16  - Lao People's Democratic Republic: 0 case in 2017 (compared with 3 for the same period in 2016), onset of paralysis of most recent case: 11-Jan-16 - Total global cases in 2016: 5  - Total in endemic countries: 2  - Total in non-endemic countries: 3 -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail [With the addition of these 5 newly confirmed cases of cVDPV associated polio in Syria, the tally is now up to 26 total cVDPV cases during 2017 -- 22 in Syria and 4 in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. All 5 of the newly confirmed cases were from Deir Al Zour suggesting transmission is still somewhat localized in the province. As a reminder, in the previous update (see Poliomyelitis update (13): Syria (DY, RA), global http://promedmail.org/post/20170622.5124548) there was mention of a total of 65 acute flaccid paralysis (SFP) cases that had been detected in Deir al Zour since the beginning of 2017. Of those 65, 22 had tested negative, 5 were pending final laboratory results (?the 5 newly confirmed cases), 22 were en route to a laboratory for analysis. Presumably those latter 22 are still undergoing testing, and we should expect additional cases to be confirmed in the coming period. Unfortunately, the affected area in Syria is an area with civil unrest, with difficult access to provide both outbreak focused as well as routine focused immunization activities. The identification of WPV1 in an environmental sample in Karachi (Sindh province) Pakistan is also cause for concern. Of note is that this sample was taken from the same location as the previous week's environmental sample that was also positive for WPV1, suggesting there is ongoing circulation of the WPV1 in the country, and in Sindh province specifically. A map showing the locations of both WPV1 and cVDPV2 cases worldwide can be found at: . For a map of Syria showing provinces, see  . Deir Al Zour is referred to as Dayr az Zawr in this map. The HealthMap/ProMED map of Syria can be found at  . - Mod.MPP] ****** [2] VDPV impact - media report Date: Wed 28 Jun 2017 Source: NPR [Naational Public Radio] Mutant Strains Of Polio Vaccine Now Cause More Paralysis Than Wild Polio -------------------------- For the 1st time, the number of children paralyzed by mutant strains of the polio vaccine are greater than the number of children paralyzed by polio itself. So far in 2017, there have been only 6 cases of \"wild\" polio reported anywhere in the world. By \"wild,\" public health officials mean the disease caused by polio virus found naturally in the environment. By contrast, there have been 21 cases of vaccine-derived polio this year [note in the above GPEI update, the tally is now up to 26 with the addition of the 5 newly confirmed cases in Syria. - Mod.MPP]. These cases look remarkably similar to regular polio. But laboratory tests show they're caused by remnants of the oral polio vaccine that have gotten loose in the environment, mutated and regained their ability to paralyze unvaccinated children \"It's actually an interesting conundrum. The very tool you are using for [polio] eradication is causing the problem,\" says Raul Andino, a professor of microbiology at the University of California at San Francisco. The oral polio vaccine used throughout most of the developing world contains a form of the virus that has been weakened in the laboratory. But it's still a live virus. (This is a different vaccine than the injectable one used in the U.S. and most developed countries. The injectable vaccine is far more expensive and does not contain live forms of the virus.) Andino studies how viruses mutate. In a study published in March [2017], he and his colleagues found that the laboratory-weakened virus used in the oral polio vaccine can very rapidly regain its strength if it starts spreading on its own. After a child is vaccinated with live polio virus, the virus replicates inside the child's intestine and eventually is excreted. In places with poor sanitation, fecal matter can enter the drinking water supply and the virus is able to start spreading from person to person. \"We discovered there's only a few [mutations] that have to happen and they happen rather quickly in the 1st month or 2 post-vaccination,\" Andino says. \"As the virus starts circulating in the community, it acquires further mutations that make it basically indistinguishable from the wild-type virus. It's polio in terms of virulence and in terms of how the virus spreads.\" In June [2017], the World Health Organization reported 15 cases of children paralyzed in Syria by vaccine-derived forms of polio. These cases come on top of 2 other vaccine-derived polio cases earlier this year in Syria and 4 in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. \"In Syria, there may be more cases coming up,\" says Michel Zaffran, the director of polio eradication at the World Health Organization. He says lab work is still being done on about a dozen more cases of paralysis to confirm whether they're polio or something else. The cases in Syria are all in the east of the country near the border with Iraq. It has become fairly common each year for there to be 1 or 2 small outbreaks of vaccine-derived polio. These outbreaks tend to happen in conflict zones where health care systems have collapsed. \"These outbreaks are occurring only in very rare cases and only in places where children are not immunized,\" says Zaffran. The regular polio vaccine protects children from vaccine-derived strains of the virus just as it protects them from regular polio. Vaccine-derived outbreaks, he says, \"occur where there are large pockets of unimmunized children, pockets sufficiently large to allow for the circulation of the virus.\" WHO is staging a massive response to the Syrian outbreak. WHO plans to work with local health officials and aid groups to vaccinate a quarter of a million children in early July [2017]. The goal is to reach every child younger than 5 in the area with 2 doses of 2 different types of polio vaccine, spaced 1 to 2 weeks apart. This would be a logistical challenge in most parts of the world, never mind in war-torn Syria. \"The access in these areas is a bit limited because of the presence of ISIS,\" Zaffran says in what seems like an understatement. Eastern Syria is home right now to Syrians who've fled from Raqqa (the ISIS capital in Syria), other parts of the country and even Iraq. \"Also there's a risk that the fighting might actually move to this area.\" Zaffran is confident that the rogue vaccine-derived virus circulating in eastern Syria right now can be wiped out with a massive blast of more vaccine. \"We knew that we were going to have such outbreaks. We've had them in the past. We continue to have them now. We know how to find them, and we know how to interrupt them. We have the tools to do that,\" Zaffran says. \"So it's hiccup ... a very regrettable hiccup for the poor children that have been paralyzed, of course. But with regards to the whole initiative, you know it's not something that is unexpected.\" WHO is attempting to phase out the use of live oral polio vaccine to eliminate the risk that the active virus in the vaccine could mutate into a form that can harm unvaccinated children. But for now, the live vaccine continues to be the workhorse of the global polio eradication campaign for a couple of reasons. 1st it's cheap, costing only about 10 cents a dose versus USD $3 a dose for the injectable, killed vaccine. 2nd, it can be given as drops into a child's mouth, which makes it far easier to administer than the inactivated or \"killed\" vaccine, which has to be injected. 3rd, there simply isn't enough killed vaccine on the market to vaccinate every child on the planet, and vaccine manufacturers don't have the capacity to produce the quantities that would be needed if such a switch happened immediately. And finally, the live vaccine stops transmission of the polio virus entirely in a community if sufficient numbers of people are vaccinated. The killed vaccine doesn't fully block the virus from spreading because a person who is immunized can still carry and spread the polio virus. And this is an important difference between these 2 types of vaccines when the goal is to exterminate the polio virus. \"The fact is this [the live oral polio vaccine] is the only tool that we have that can eradicate the disease,\" says Zaffran. That eradication effort has been incredibly successful. In 1988, when the campaign began, there were 350 000 cases of polio around the world each year compared with the 6 so far this year [2017]. Zaffran credits the oral polio vaccine with getting the world incredibly close to wiping out a terrible disease. \"Four regions of the world have totally eradicated the disease with the use of the oral polio vaccine,\" he notes. \"Of course we need to recognize that there have been a few cases of children paralyzed because of the vaccine virus, which is regrettable. But, you know, from a public health perspective, the benefits far outweigh the risk.\" [Byline: Jason Beaubien] -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail [In formulating vaccination policies, a risk benefit analysis is a key process. In the case of polio vaccination, a critical question a country faces is \"what is the risk of disease from the wild poliovirus\" vs \"what is the risk of disease from the vaccine virus\". In the case of the WPV, the risk of paralysis among unvaccinated individuals averages 1 case per every 200 infected individuals. In the case of the vaccine virus, the risk of paralysis among those receiving the vaccine is approximately 1 case per every 2.7 million doses of vaccine administered. In the case of cVDPV there have been a total of 865 cases reported to WHO since 2000 with more than 10 billion doses administered during the period 2005 to 2015 - hence a very very low risk. Wherever there is persistent circulation of the WPV (wild poliovirus), the risk of infection with the WPV is high, especially if there are pockets of susceptibles for the virus to circulate through. In contrast, in countries where there has not been circulation of the WPV in years, when there is the appearance of vaccine associated disease as the only form of polio identified in the country, that balance of risk and benefit has shifted. That being said, with the 2016 identification of WPV associated disease in Nigeria, in an area that had suboptimal vaccination coverages due to civil unrest, served as a reminder that the WPV could be circulating \"under the radarscope\" of the public health infrastructure, only to surface when there is access to the area or population at risk. Hence, the risk benefit analysis doesn't necessarily have a clearly definable risk identification. In response to the observation above that \"It's actually an interesting conundrum. The very tool you are using for [polio] eradication is causing the problem,\" countries that have been polio-free were migrating to the use of the inactivated poliovirus vaccine (IPV) through the years, and the end game strategy for polio eradication includes the complete shift to IPV worldwide. As type 2 VDPV is the most labile virus, with 723 out of 865 (83.6 percent) cVDPV polio cases associated with type 2 cVDPV, as of April 2016, the trivalent oral poliovirus vaccine was replaced with a bivalent poliovirus vaccine, omitting the type 2 vaccine virus, with the intent  being to eliminate OPV2 virus from the environment. Unfortunately the virus was already circulating in Syria pre-dating this vaccine switch. (see for tables showing the cVDPV isolates since 2000 and for a description of the endgame strategy. The advantages of the OPV include the ease in administration (drops are administered into the mouth), thereby permitting less technical training than needed to administer an injection, the observation that a recently vaccinated individual excretes the vaccine virus into the environment and thereby \"vaccinates\" others in the process (the conundrum), and produces local immunity in the intestines blocking continuation of circulation of WPV if the individual is exposed to it.  This latter advantage was seen in Israel in 2013. Israel had been using exclusively IPV since 2005. In 2013, there were multiple isolates of WPV1 from environmental samples tested moving chronologically from the south of the country to the north. While the WPV was identified from weekly samples, during a 5-6 month period in 2013, there were no cases of paralytic poliomyelitis identified in the country in general and in the geographic areas surrounding were the positive environmental samples were taken from. Hence, while the vaccine protected the vaccinated individuals (Israel had reported a 94 percent vaccination coverage at that time), it did not completely interrupt transmission of the WPV. (see prior ProMED-mail posts listed below). We are not far away from the switch in use of the trivalent OPV (containing vaccine viruses type 1, 2 and 3), to the elimination of the type 2 vaccine virus from the vaccine administered in the majority of countries around the world... the switchover date was in April 2016, a bit more than a year ago. As there are other geographic areas with suboptimal vaccination coverages, it would not be too much of a surprise to identify other (hopefully small) foci with cVDPV associated polio cases in the coming period. - Mod.MPP] ****** [3] AFP private sector reporting challenges - Kuwait Date: Wed 28 Jun 2017 Source: Arab Times - Kuwait Ministry blames private health sector of failure to report detection of cases - 'Acute flaccid paralysis' -------------------- Ministry of Health has blamed private health sector for failure to report detection of cases of acute flaccid paralysis to the Department of Public Health on time, reports Al-Jarida daily quoting a health source. According to the report released by the Department of Public Health at the Ministry of Health, the situation coincides with a warning from the World Health Organization against resurface of polio in Syria and newly detected cases of polio in Der Al-Zour, Syria through the same stock of oral vaccine. It blames private health sector for defying the ministerial decision that ordered prompt report of acute flaccid paralysis detected. It indicated failure to report the cases has negative implication on integrity and position of Kuwait by continuing to declare to the World Health Organization that the country is free from polio. It recommended the ministry should contact the private health sector to urge them give precise information about cases detected to enable the ministry record it appropriately. This is one of the standard conditions and procedures required to declare the country polio free, it stated. -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail [This last article was included as a reminder of both concerns of countries near to Syria as well as a reminder of the challenges the public health infrastructure in receiving timely reports from the private sector. An unfortunate but common situation experienced by many countries. - Mod.MPP ] [", "TICK-BORNE ENCEPHALITIS - FRANCE ******************************** A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Wed 28 Jun 2017 Source: BMJ Case Reports 2017; doi:10.1136/bcr-2017-220841 [edited] A 61-year-old woman presented to the emergency department (ED) with a one-week fever associated with progressive headache. She also reported weakness and paraesthesias in both legs. In the ED, the patient had normal vital parameters and reported no other medical history. Clinical examination showed slight neck stiffness; the rest of the examination was normal. Laboratory findings showed a mild inflammatory syndrome. The patient had a lumbar punction; the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) showed moderate pleocytosis (140 leucocytes/\u03bcL with a mononuclear cell dominance). After a normal CT scan, an MRI examination was performed (figures 1and 2). Several days later, intrathecal IgM and IgG antibodies came back positive [for tick-borne encephalitis]. Tickborne encephalitis virus (TBEV) is a flavivirus that is transmitted by _Ixodes spp_ ticks in a vast area (from western Europe to Japan). TBEV is endemic in Europe where climatic conditions are suitable for its circulation. After an 8-day incubation period following the tick bite, frequently (1/3) unnoted by patients, the disease is usually biphasic. Initially, fever, fatigue and headache are the unspecific symptoms. The clinical spectrum in the 2nd stage ranges from meningitis to severe encephalitis or myelitis. Serodiagnosis of TBEV is mostly straightforward (TBEV-IgM and IgG in blood or CSF).1 This represents around 10\u2009000 cases every year; morbidity is age related (highest in adults). About 1/3 of patients will have long-lasting sequelae (cognitive dysfunction, postencephalitic syndrome). No specific treatment exists, and active immunization is the main preventive measure. Learning points  - Flavivirus is transmitted by _Ixodes spp_ (from western Europe to the eastern coast of Japan).  - The serological diagnosis is usually straightforward.  - There is no specific treatment, and immunization is the main preventive measure. -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail [It is not stated if the patient was infected in France or in Germany. Since 2 of the 3 authors are based in French health facilities, we assume that the patient was infected in France. Assuming that the patient is from France, this is the 1st report of a tick-borne encephalitis case that ProMED-mail has posted for France. However, the virus is widely distributed across Europe with many cases reported in Germany. This year (2017) evidence of virus presence in Netherlands in roe deer (_Capreolus capreolus_) and in _Ixodes ricinus_ ticks there was reported. It is reasonable to assume that the virus is circulating in France, as well. The WHO states, \"Approximately 10 000-12 000 clinical cases of tick-borne encephalitis are reported each year, but this figure is believed to be significantly lower than the actual total. Immunization offers the most effective protection. Currently, there are 4 widely used vaccines of assured quality: FSME-Immun and Encepur, manufactured in Austria and Germany respectively, and based on European strains of the virus; and TBE-Moscow and EnceVir, manufactured in the Russian Federation and based on Far-Eastern strains. The 4 vaccines are considered to be safe and efficacious.\" Tickborne encephalitis is a viral infection caused by one of 3 tickborne encephalitis virus (TBEV) subtypes belonging to the Flaviviridae family: Central European, Siberian, and Far Eastern (formerly known as Russian spring-summer encephalitis). It is transmitted to humans through the bite of infected _Ixodes_ ticks. - Mod.TY A HealthMap of France can be accessed at A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  .] [", "LEGIONELLOSIS - USA (08): (FLORIDA) GYM *************************************** A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Tues 27 Jun 2017 2:00 PM Source: Orlando Sentinel [edited] An LA Fitness club near the Hunter's Creek neighborhood tested positive for the bacteria that causes Legionnaires' disease while state health investigators await results from another club location. The 2 LA Fitness clubs in the area have been under investigation since May [2017] by Florida Department of Health officials in Orange County after 4 separate cases of Legionnaires' were traced back to the 2 gyms. The club that tested positive is at 12 700 S. Orange Blossom Trail, about 12 miles south of downtown Orlando. Epidemiologists are still waiting for results from water tests taken at the LA Fitness in Metro West; those could be back within the week, said Kent Donahue, a spokesman for the Florida Department of Health in Orange County. The samples were taken at several spots in the Hunters Creek gym, \"before the hyperchlorination of the spa and the install of point-of-use filters on the showers,\" Donahue said in an email. Health officials were not able to provide the status of the 4 people that contracted Legionnaires'. Up to 2 customers at each facility were diagnosed with Legionnaires' disease, a severe form of pneumonia caused by _Legionella_ bacteria, which usually grows in closed water systems. The bacteria can be especially harmful to people with compromised respiratory systems and the elderly. The bacteria grow in the water pipes at large buildings and then is expelled and turned into mist when devices such as showers and spas are turned on. LA Fitness sent warnings to customers of the 2 clubs earlier this month [June 2017] warning about the possible contamination. LA Fitness has not responded to a request for comment about the positive test. Reports of Legionnaires' disease and _Legionella_ bacteria happen more frequently in enclosed water systems, such as hot tubs, according to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. The CDC reports that there were about 6000 cases of Legionnaires' diseases reported in 2015 in the United States. LA Fitness has been involved in 2 other Legionnaires' investigations in Orange County in the last decade, including in 2008 at a club on Michigan Street in Orlando and in 2010 at an LA Fitness in the Waterford Lakes area. However, health clubs are not a common source of Legionnaires' disease, said Laura Cooley, a medical epidemiologist for the CDC. State health officials recommended that LA Fitness consult with a water management company to address the issues. Earlier this month [June 2017] a spokeswoman for LA Fitness said the company has hired water treatment firm Nalco Company to help take care of any problems. Investigators in Lake County are also looking into 3 cases of Legionnaires' disease tied to the hot tub at a senior living community in Clermont. Results from that test were not yet available. [See ProMED-mail post Legionellosis - USA (06): (FL) adult community, hot tub http://promedmail.org/post/20170615.5107309.] -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail Rapporteur George A Robertson [ProMED-mail thanks George Robertson for his submission. The above news report does not specify the sites within the LA Fitness club that tested positive for _Legionella_, and if the species and genotypes of _Legionella_ isolated from patients and the environmental water sources matched. Genotyping the isolates helps delineate transmission pathways. The state of Florida can be located on the HealthMap/ProMED-mail interactive map at . Orange County can be seen on the map at  . - Mod.ML A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  .] [", "CHOLERA, DIARRHEA AND DYSENTERY UPDATE (64): ASIA (YEMEN) ********************************************************* A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Thu 29 Jun 2017 Source: Outbreak News Today [edited] The Ministry of Public Health and Population of Yemen has recorded a total of 39 688 suspected cholera cases and 183 associated deaths during the period 22 to 27 June 2017. According to a WHO Daily Epidemiology update today, [Thu 29 Jun 2017], 231 364 suspected cholera cases and 1439 deaths have been recorded since 27 Apr 2017. The overall case-fatality rate is 0.6 percent although it is higher in some areas and among certain age groups. While cholera is endemic in Yemen, the country has experienced a surge in cholera cases during the past 2 months, with nearly 5000 cases reported per day. Ongoing conflict, destroyed health, water and sanitation infrastructure and malnutrition have caused the people to be more vulnerable to diseases, including cholera. WHO and health partners are actively supporting the Ministry through a cholera task force to improve cholera response efforts at the national and local levels. This includes the establishment of diarrhea treatment facilities, oral dehydration centers, training of health workers to manage cases, water purification in communities, deployment of rapid response team to manage cholera cases investigations and respond to the outbreak, enhancement of Yemen's disease early warning surveillance systems, and provision of emergency medical supplies to treatment facilities. -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail [[The statistics of the dreadfully impressive ongoing epidemic in Yemen in 2017 are: Date (2017) / Cases / Deaths 8 May / 1360 / 25 11 May / 2752 / 51 13 May / 8595 / 115 14 May / 11 000 / 180 17 May / 17 200 / 209 19 May / 23 500 / 242 21 May / 29 300 / 315 22 May / 35 217 / 361 24 May / 42 207 / 420 27 May / 51 832 / 471 30 May / 65 300 / 532 02 Jun / 73 700 / 605 04 Jun / 86 400 / 676 05 Jun / 91 400 / 728 06 Jun / 96 000 / 746 07 Jun / 101 820 / 789 10 Jun / 116 700 / 869 12 Jun / 124 002 / 923 14 Jun / 140 116 / 989 16 Jun / 151 000 / 1054 19 Jun / 166 976 / 1146 21 Jun / 179 548 / 1205 23 Jun / 200 000 / 1310 26 Jun / 219 000 / 1400 28 Jun / 231 364 / 1439 To be consistent with past posts, the date is the day prior to the specific posting but, as this one, may not reflect the data point day. In the last 4 weeks, 166 000 cases and about 900 deaths have been reported, with no clear sign of the numbers slowing down. - Mod.LL A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  .] [", "STREPTOCOCCUS GROUP B - USA: (OREGON) NEONATAL INFECTION, MATERNAL PLACENTA INGESTION ************************************************************************************* A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Thu 29 Jun 2017 Source: MMWR 66(25);677-678 [edited] Late-Onset Infant Group B Streptococcus Infection Associated with Maternal Consumption of Capsules Containing Dehydrated Placenta -- Oregon, 2016 ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ In September 2016, the Oregon Health Authority was notified of a case of late-onset group B _Streptococcus agalactiae_ (GBS) bacteremia in an infant that began 5 days after completion of treatment for early-onset GBS bacteremia. The infant was born at term following an uncomplicated pregnancy; maternal GBS vaginal/rectal screening culture at 37 weeks' gestation was negative. Shortly after birth, the infant developed signs of respiratory distress and was transferred to the neonatal intensive care unit where blood and cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) were obtained for culture; antibacterials were initiated for presumed sepsis. The blood culture was positive for penicillin-sensitive, clindamycin-intermediate GBS. CSF culture was negative. The infant was discharged and went home after completing an 11-day course of ampicillin (200 mg/kg/day). Up to 5 days later, the infant was taken to the emergency department because of irritability and was admitted to a 2nd hospital. A blood culture yielded penicillin-sensitive, clindamycin-sensitive GBS. CSF was sterile, expressed breast milk did not yield GBS, and serial exams did not reveal a source. Three days into the infant's admission to the 2nd hospital, the treating physician was notified by a physician from the birth hospital that the mother had requested release of the placenta at the time of delivery. The mother confirmed that she had registered with Company A to pick up and encapsulate her placenta for ingestion. Three days after the infant's birth, the mother had received the dehydrated, encapsulated placenta and began ingesting 2 capsules 3 times daily. The physician instructed the mother to stop consuming the capsules. A sample of the capsules was cultured, yielding penicillin-sensitive, clindamycin-sensitive GBS. The infant was treated with ampicillin (300 mg/kg/day) for 14 days and gentamicin (3 mg/kg/daily) for the 1st 6 days and discharged home. The 3 GBS isolates (1 from each blood infection, and 1 from the placenta capsules) were indistinguishable by pulsed-field gel electrophoresis. Whole genome sequencing (WGS) performed at CDC revealed no single nucleotide polymorphisms between strains. WGS predicted serotype III, multilocus sequence type 17 (ST17), and tetM+ (tetracycline resistance). The strains had surface-anchored hypervirulent GBS adhesin Hvga, pilus island PI2b, and serine-rich repeat protein Srr2 (1); these virulence factors can facilitate adhesion and invasion from the infant's intestine into the bloodstream and potentially across the blood brain barrier (2). Although transmission from other colonized household members could not be ruled out, the final diagnosis was late-onset GBS disease attributable to high maternal colonization secondary to consumption of GBS-infected placental tissue (3). Placenta ingestion has recently been promoted to postpartum women for its physical and psychological benefits, although scientific evidence to support this is lacking (4). Placental tissue is consumed raw or prepared by cooking, desiccation, preservation, and other modalities (5). Expectant mothers register for Company A's services before delivery and report preexisting infection with human immunodeficiency virus/acquired immunodeficiency syndrome, hepatitis, herpes, chlamydia, syphilis, and Lyme disease; however, the company does not ask about intra- or postpartum infections. According to Company A's website, the placenta is cleaned, sliced, and dehydrated at 115\u00b0F-160\u00b0F (46\u00b0C-71\u00b0C), then ground and placed into about 115-200 gelatin capsules, and stored at room temperature. No standards exist for processing placenta for consumption. Heating at 130 F (54 C) for 121 minutes is required to reduce _Salmonella_ bacterial counts by 7 log10 (6). In this case, heating for sufficient time at a temperature adequate to decrease GBS bacterial counts might not have been reached. Consumption of contaminated placenta capsules might have elevated maternal GBS intestinal and skin colonization, facilitating transfer to the infant. The placenta encapsulation process does not per se eradicate infectious pathogens; thus, placenta capsule ingestion should be avoided. In cases of maternal GBS colonization, chorioamnionitis, or early-onset neonatal GBS infection, ingestion of capsules containing contaminated placenta could heighten maternal colonization, thereby increasing an infant's risk for late-onset neonatal GBS infection. Clinicians should inquire about a history of placenta ingestion in cases of late-onset GBS infection and educate mothers interested in placenta encapsulation about the potential risks. References ---------- 1. Metcalf BJ, Chochua S, Gertz RE Jr, et al: Active Bacterial Core Surveillance Team. Short-read whole genome sequencing for determination of antimicrobial resistance mechanisms and capsular serotypes of current invasive Streptococcus agalactiae recovered in the USA. Clin Microbiol Infect 2017;S1198-743X(17)30118-0. 2. Landwehr-Kenzel S, Henneke P: Interaction of Streptococcus agalactiae and cellular innate immunity in colonization and disease. Front Immunol 2014;5:519. 3. Moylett EH, Fernandez M, Rench MA, Hickman ME, Baker CJ: A 5-year review of recurrent group B streptococcal disease: lessons from twin infants. Clin Infect Dis 2000;30:282-287. 4. Marraccini ME, Gorman KS: Exploring placentophagy in humans: problems and recommendations. J Midwifery Womens Health 2015;60:371-379. 5. Hayes EH: Consumption of the placenta in the postpartum period. J Obstet Gynecol Neonatal Nurs 2016;45:78-89. [Authors: Buser GL, Mat\u00f3 S, Zhang AY, Metcalf BJ, Beall B, Thomas AR] -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail [Although not stated, this may well be the 1st well documented case of neonatal or maternal infection associated with placentophagia (or placentaphagy). The following publication presents a literature on the subject of placenta ingestion: Joseph R, Giovinazzo M, Brown M: A literature review on the practice of placentophagia. Nurs Womens Health. 2016;20: 476-483. Abstract -------- \"Placentophagia (consuming the placenta) has historically not been a common practice among humans. Over the past few decades the practice has gained attention as more women, particularly educated, middle-class, White American women, choose to partake in this practice. Purported benefits of placentophagia include pain relief, increased breast milk production, and decreased risk of postpartum depression; however, there is a lack of evidence to support these claims. The placenta can be consumed raw, cooked, or encapsulated; it can be used for keepsakes; or it can be used to make topical applications such as dermatologic creams and hair-growth products. Placentophagia has typically been viewed as a personal choice, resulting in little rigorous scientific research on the topic. More research is necessary to determine if the purported health benefits of placentophagia are proven.\" - Mod.LL A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  .] [", "GASTROENTERITIS - BRAZIL (02): (RIO GRANDE DO SUL, ESPIRITO SANTO) ******************************************************************* A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Thu 29 Jun 2017 Source: EpiCore Global Surveillance Project [edited] The outbreak in Rio Grande do Sul, occurred in a downtown named Sao Joao do Polesine, I live there and I'm one victim. Some people started to vomit and to have watery diarrhea on [Sun 25 Jun 2017], at night, after a lunch with potatoes, salad (boiled potatoes and eggs), rice, and meat. Other people, including myself, started on [Mon 26 Jun 2017] morning, with the same symptoms. Plus the cited symptoms, we had colic, fever and headache, weakness and pain in all the body. There was a verbal report that some people returned to hospital with blood in the feces on the 4th day. There are more people affected in Santa Maria, Porto Alegre and other cities beside Sao Joao do Polesine. I'm not sure if it is due to salmonellosis. People used to blame it due to the eggs used in the potato salad, but in this case eggs where cooked previously. It is likely some cross contamination. Material was already collected and is being analyzed by a governmental laboratory (LACEN I guess). Around a month ago [May 2017] there was another gastroenteritis outbreak in the town. Diarrhea, vomit and fever, it was not investigated but a physician blamed a bacterial infection. -- Communicated by: EpiCore Global Surveillance Project member Ana Antonello Microbiology, PhD [ProMED thanks Dr Antonello for this truly 1st person report concerning the Rio Grande do Sul cluster of illness. - Mod.LL A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  .] [", "ANTHRAX - INDIA (11): (ANDHRA PRADESH) LIVESTOCK VACCINATION ************************************************************ A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Fri 30 Jun 2017 12:42 PM Source: The New Indian Express/Express Service [edited] After 8 positive cases of cutaneous anthrax were reported from the Kodupunjuvalasa village of Araku Valley in Vizag Agency, teams from the Animal Husbandry department administered vaccination to 8942 animals, including cattle, goat and sheep, at 5 villages in 10-km [6.21 miles] radius on Thursday [June 2017]: [5243 cattle and 3699 sheep and goats in 16 revenue villages in relation to known and confirmed cases]. While the patients are undergoing treatment in the dermatology department of the King George Hospital (KGH) in Vizag, the survey teams found no suspected cases. During a survey, the team of Animal Husbandry department found no animal infected or in ill-health condition. \"When we inquired of the villagers, it was found that meat of a dead goat which had anthrax was consumed by a group of villagers, who developed skin infections after 3 weeks,\" said Koteswara Rao, the joint director, Animal Husbandry department. According to the Animal Husbandry Department officials, animals should be buried in 6 foot deep. The spores of animals will be in soil for more than 60 years. It is mostly during rainy season that the alkaline levels will make the spores active. Any animal which drinks the infected water or eats grass, it will contract anthrax. \"In the case of severely infected animal, it will die within hours. Soon after the tribals distribute the meat among the neighbors without the knowledge of how it died,\" Rao said. Meanwhile, the teams which surveyed the surrounding villages in the agency area found no such anthrax symptoms in any animal. Out of a total of 21 persons of Kondipunjuvalasa who consumed the meat of the infected goat, 8 were reported positive and are being treated at the dermatology department of the KGH. According to DMHO Uma Sundari, the patients are slowly getting the symptoms of cutaneous anthrax. \"As a precautionary measure, we have asked the PHC to treat them,\" said the DMHO. -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail [The incubation period for anthrax is a function of exposure dose, so cases appearing after 3 weeks will have had a minimal exposure. Sterne vaccine is a live livestock vaccine and provides protection for 9+ months; all immunity in anthrax is temporary, even from a clinical exposure, whether in humans or cattle. Repeat cases have been seen and documented. With humans the repeat infection is after about 10 years; with livestock it is sooner though one will see 10-year cycles of multiple cases in wild life. The Animal Husbandry Department is to be congratulated on their structured and careful response. With reasonable luck that should be the end of it for the while. Of course the newspaper articles and TV news reports can stimulate awareness and otherwise silent livestock owners may now raise their hands in regard to unexpected animal deaths and ask for help. Which when you come to think of it is the very purpose of such reporting. The more often livestock owners report such events, the greater the chances of effective control. Waiting for human cases to surface is dodgy at best. Remember it was just 8 persons out of 21 (38 percent) developed skin lesions and in this instance there were no gastroenteric cases, fortunately. The meat must have been well cooked. - Mod.MHJ A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  .] [", "TETANUS - ITALY (02): COMMENTARY ******************************** A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Thu 29 Jun 2017 Source: GIDEON (Global Infectious Disease Epidemiology Network) [edited] re: ProMED-mail post: Tetanus - Italy: (SD) unimmunized child http://promedmail.org/post/20170629.5139890 ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- Although the incidence of tetanus in Europe has been decreasing for many years, disease rates in Italy have changed little during the past 2 decades. In fact, Italy currently accounts for more cases in the region than any other country. See graph: Reference: Berger S: 2017. Tetanus: Global Status. 528 pages, 812 graphs, 349 references. Gideon e-books, -- Communicated by: Prof. Steve Berger Geographic Medicine Tel Aviv Medical Center Israel [ProMED thanks Dr Berger and Gideon Online for his continued contributions. It is curious that Italy accounts for more cases of tetanus than other European countries. - Mod.LL A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  .] [", "WHITE NOSE SYNDROME, BATS - NORTH AMERICA (08): (ALABAMA) BAT POPULATION DECLINE ******************************************************************************** A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Thu 29 Jun 2017 Source: ABC33 40 [edited] A disease that began 10 years ago in New York is now in 30 states in the U.S., including Alabama. White Nose Syndrome is killing bats, which are critical to our way of life. Right now, a group of researchers gathering for 3 days at Ruffner Mountain Nature Preserve is examining local bats to determine how the disease is affecting them. Alabama has 15 species of bats. Researchers at Ruffner are on day one of their project this year [2017], and say so far the findings are mortifying. \"It's devastating for us bat lovers to know a few years ago we caught 300 in the area, and this year [2017] we caught just 50,\" says Wildlife Educator Vicky Beckham Smith. The rapid decrease in America's bat population is devastating to researchers with a distinct appreciation for the mammals, but it's also bad news for the general public. Bats help control the insect population. Without bats, who can eat 1/3 of their weight in bugs just overnight, our yards, homes, and crops would be crawling with pests. \"A lot of farmers are actually putting up bat houses to attract bats to their areas.\" That creates a natural and highly effective pest control, allowing farmers to avoid chemical pesticides on crops raised for human consumption. Using bats also saves farmers money. \"It's billions of dollars that they save.\" But, over the past 10 years there has been an 80 to 90 percent drop in certain bat species. \"Which pretty much annihilate the bats in certain areas,\" says Jamie Nobles, Ruffner Conservation Director. White Nose Syndrome is a white fungus that infects the muzzle, ears, and wings of hibernating bats. It's transmitted by humans, animals, and other bats carrying spores from place to place. Right now, anti-fungal solutions can treat infected bats that are found and helped. But, it does not prevent the disease from attacking in the 1st place. This creates a dire need for a dwindling group that does not regrow its population very quickly. Reproduction for bats is very limited. They have just one pup per year. Right now, a group of researchers at the University of Georgia could have an answer to the problem. It turns out the solution they originally created to prevent fungus in bananas, has been shown to effectively battle White Nose Syndrome in bats. More research is needed. [Byline: Jennifer Gonsoulin] -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts [The geographical distribution of WNS as of 19 Jun 2017 can be seen at  . - Mod.PMB A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  .] [", "CRAYFISH PLAGUE - IRELAND (02): WHITE-CLAWED CRAYFISH, CONFIRMED, OIE ********************************************************************** A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Thu 29 Jun 2017 Source: OIE, WAHID (World Animal Health Information Database), weekly disease information 2017; 30 (26) [edited] Crayfish plague (_Aphanomyces astaci_), Ireland ------------------------------------------------------- Information received on 29 Jun 2017 from Dr Martin Blake, Chief Veterinary Officer, Department of Agriculture, Food and the Marine, Agriculture House, Dublin, Ireland Summary Report type: immediate notification Date of start of the event: 5 May 2017 Date of confirmation of the event: 16 May 2017 Reason for notification: Reoccurrence of a listed disease Date of previous occurrence: 1 Sep 2015 Manifestation of disease: clinical disease Causal agent: _Aphanomyces astaci_ Nature of diagnosis: clinical, laboratory (advanced) This event pertains to the whole country New outbreaks (2) Outbreak 1: River Suir, Tipperary Date of start of the outbreak: 5 May 2017 Outbreak status: resolved (29 Jun 2017) Epidemiological unit: river system Water type: fresh water Population type: wild Production system: open Affected animals: Species / Morbidity / Mortality / Susceptible / Cases / Deaths / Killed and disposed of / Slaughtered White clawed crayfish (_Austropotamobius pallipes_) (kg) / 100 percent / 100 percent / 400 000 / 400 000 / 400 000 / 0 / 0 / Outbreak 2: River Deel, Limerick Date of start of the outbreak: 7 May 2017 Outbreak status: resolved (29 Jun 2017) Epidemiological unit: river system Water type: fresh water Population type: wild Production system: open Affected animals: Species / Morbidity / Mortality / Susceptible / Cases / Deaths / Killed and disposed of / Slaughtered White clawed crayfish (_Austropotamobius pallipes_) (kg) / 100 percent / 100 percent / 1000 / 1000 / 1000 / 0 / 0 / Summary of outbreaks: Total outbreaks: 2 Total animals affected: Species / Susceptible / Cases / Deaths / Killed and disposed of / Slaughtered White clawed crayfish (_Austropotamobius pallipes_) (kg) / 401 000 / 401 000 / 401 000 / 0 / 0 / Outbreak statistics: Species / Apparent morbidity rate / Apparent mortality rate / Apparent case fatality rate / Proportion susceptible animals lost* White clawed crayfish (_Austropotamobius pallipes_)/ 100 percent / 100 percent / 100 percent / 100 percent * Removed from the susceptible population through death, destruction, and / or slaughter Epidemiology Source of the outbreak(s) or origin of infection: unknown or inconclusive Control measures Measures applied: movement control inside the country, surveillance outside infected and/or protection zone, screening, zoning, disinfection, vaccination permitted (if a vaccine exists), no treatment of affected animals Measures to be applied: No other measures Diagnostic test results Laboratory name and type: The Marine Institute (National laboratory) Species / Test / Test date / Result White clawed crayfish (_Austropotamobius pallipes_) / polymerase chain reaction (PCR) / 16 May 2017 / Positive White clawed crayfish (_Austropotamobius pallipes_) / polymerase chain reaction (PCR) / 1 Jun 2017 / Positive Future reporting The event is continuing. Weekly follow-up reports will be submitted. [The location of the outbreak can be seen on the interactive map included in the OIE report at the source URL above.] -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail [_Austropotamobius pallipes_, the white-clawed crayfish of Western European streams, has become restricted in distribution over the past century. Crayfish fungal plague, fatal to white-clawed crayfish, has affected many European countries. It is caused by a fungus _Aphanomyces astaci_ that was brought into Europe by the introduction of _Procambarus clarkii_, a freshwater crayfish species of Lousiana, USA, which is naturally infected by this pathogen, although it does not develop clinical disease. For a picture of a white-clawed crayfish go to  . - Mod.PMB A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  .] [", "CHRONIC WASTING DISEASE, MACAQUES - CANADA: SUSCEPTIBLE ******************************************************* A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Wed 28 Jun 2017 11:05 a.m. Source: Wisconsin State Farmer [edited] Macaque monkeys contracted chronic wasting disease after eating meat from CWD-positive deer, according to Canadian researchers. The findings are the 1st known oral transmissions of the prion disease to a primate and have heightened concerns of human susceptibility to CWD. \"The assumption was for the longest time that chronic wasting disease was not a threat to human health,\" said Stefanie Czub, prion researcher with the Canadian Food Inspection Agency, in remarks published June 24 [2017] in The Tyee, a Vancouver, B.C. magazine. \"But with the new data it seems we need to revisit this view to some degree.\" Czub is leading the project, which began in 2009 and is funded by Alberta Prion Research Institute at the University of Calgary. Eighteen macaques, a type of monkey, have been exposed to CWD in various ways to study the zoonotic potential of the disease. Three of 5 macaques that were fed infected white-tailed deer meat over a 3-year period tested positive for CWD. The meat fed to the macaques represented the human equivalent of eating a 7-ounce steak per month. Macaques that had the CWD prion injected into their brains also contracted the disease. Those that had infected material rubbed on their skin - designed to simulate contact a hunter might have while field dressing a deer - have not contracted the disease. Czub presented the results May 25 in a talk titled \"CWD Transmission into non-human Primates\" at the Prion 2017 conference in Edinburgh, Scotland. The finding of oral transmission of CWD to a primate through eating of infected meat is most troubling to scientists and conservationists. \"This study does not mean people will get CWD. But it means people need to be considering that possibility.\" Dave Clausen of Amery, a veterinarian, deer hunter and former chairman of the Wisconsin Natural Resources Board \"This study does not mean people will get CWD,\" said Dave Clausen of Amery, a veterinarian, deer hunter and former chairman of the Wisconsin Natural Resources Board. \"But it means people need to be considering that possibility.\" Wisconsin hunters and their family members likely have more contact with CWD each year than those in any other state or province. The contagious disease, caused by a misfolded prion, or protein, is found at prevalence rates exceeding 30 percent in parts of deer-rich southern Wisconsin. Last year, 442 of 3758 deer submitted for testing in the southern farmland zone were CWD-positive. But more than 10 times as many deer were killed in the zone and not tested, many of which likely carried the disease. According to the Alliance for Public Wildlife, a Canadian-based wildlife conservation organization, hunting families in North America consume between 7000 and 15 000 CWD-infected animals every year. Chronic wasting disease is fatal to deer, elk and moose. Since it is a transmissible spongiform encephalopathy (TSE) and in the same family as 2 diseases known to be fatal to humans (mad cow disease and Creutzfeldt-Jakob) researchers and health officials have long wanted to know more about the potential for inter-species CWD spread. Based on the macaque study, Health Canada issued an updated CWD risk advisory. \"While extensive disease surveillance in Canada and elsewhere has not provided any direct evidence that CWD has infected humans, the potential for CWD to be transmitted to humans cannot be excluded,\" the advisory states. \"In exercising precaution, (Health Canada) continues to advocate that the most prudent approach is to consider that CWD has the potential to infect humans.\" >From the World Health Organization to the federal Centers for Disease Control to state agencies, health officials are united in their recommendations to avoid eating meat from a CWD-positive animal. Since 2003, the Wisconsin Department of Health Services (DHS) has issued a warning against consuming CWD-positive venison. The Canadian research reinforces the agency's position, said Jennifer Miller, DHS communications specialist. \"The Wisconsin Department of Health Services is aware of the study involving macaques contracting chronic wasting disease after being fed meat from deer infected with CWD,\" said Miller. \"The department will continue to encourage hunters to have deer tested that were harvested from areas of the state where CWD is known to exist.\" Miller said the department will also continue to discourage the consumption of meat from deer harvested anywhere that showed signs of illness - for example, deer that appeared emaciated or that acted abnormally. The agency's recommendation states \"venison from deer harvested inside the CWD Management Zone should not be consumed or distributed to others until CWD test results on the sources deer are known to be negative.\" The Wisconsin guideline says venison from multiple deer should be kept separate and labeled before freezing so any meat from a CWD-positive animal can be discarded. \"Some might call the recommendation overly cautious,\" James Kazmierczak, DHS state public health veterinarian, told the Milwaukee Journal Sentinel in a July 2015 interview. \"But the CWD prion has been found in muscle tissue. So from a public health perspective, the safest path is to test your deer and not consume meat from a CWD-positive animal.\" In its Deer Hunting 2016 Pamphlet, the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources also advises hunters to not eat the eyes, brain, spinal cord, spleen, tonsils or lymph nodes of any deer; to wear rubber or latex gloves when field-dressing carcasses, and to bone out the meat from the animal. The Canadian study will likely wrap up in 2018, Czub said. The preliminary results have already caused many to take notice. \"Research on prion diseases is unveiling new findings all the time,\" Clausen said. \"This latest news confirms it's wiser than ever to get your deer tested and follow the precautions.\" -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail [We have been eating scraped sheep brains, I am sure, for many hundreds of years and so far safely. But while 3 of 5 macaques fed contaminated meat monthly over 3 years seems to be a high exposure level, it confirms the concept. So far we have been eating venison for generations and without apparent risk, but this experiment suggests that there may well be some of us who are susceptible. So do be careful and take the precautions proposed by the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources and make sure your deer has been tested before you consume it, and put the eyes, brain, spinal cord, spleen, tonsils or lymph nodes of any deer on one side. - Mod.MHJ A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  .] [", "PORCINE EPIDEMIC DIARRHEA - NORTH AMERICA (04): CANADA (MANITOBA) HUMAN COST **************************************************************************** A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Fri 30 Jun 2017 05:16 Source: Steinbach Online [edited] The President of HyLife says the challenge of the current prolonged outbreak of Porcine Epidemic Diarrhea (PED) virus in hog barns here in southeastern Manitoba is taking a toll on people. A total of 39 barns have contracted the virus this spring including a number of HyLife barns. Claude Vielfaure says their staff is being pushed to the limit in dealing with this situation. \"People have been working hard and, when these things happen, it shows the character of people and we certainly have lots of good character people who have come to the forefront and worked hard. But it is taking its toll. It's very tiring on people, all the extra work and everything that has to be done because of this.\" \"This PED virus has been a bit of a mystery. The last couple of years we've had some cases but have been able to get on top of it. But unfortunately this year [2017], it just seems to be spreading very quickly, very easily and, although everybody is working hard on containing it, it's just been a virus that's been very perplexing to us. We'll work hard and we'll get through this. It's just a matter of trying to control and reduce the number of breaks we're having and then get on top of it and we will get there.\" Vielfaure says hogs recover from the virus and return to full health except for piglets that are in the period 10 days before birth and 10 days after birth. He adds since PED has now struck in a number of sow barns, a lot of piglets are succumbing to the virus and that will have an impact on the supply chain in the future. \"When it hits sow barns, that's when the piglets pass away. It's very sad and something that is starting to affect a lot of sows barns.\" Vielfaure reiterates the team at HyLife has been terrific at dealing with this stressful situation and he appreciates all their efforts. The PED virus has no effect on humans and has no impact on food safety [Byline: Daryl Braun] -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail [Hopefully the PED vaccine mentioned in the previous post -- 16 Jun 2017 Porcine epidemic diarrhea - North America (03): Canada (MB) vaccination http://promedmail.org/post/20170616.5111001 -- will have a beneficial impact both on the pigs and indirectly on hog workers. - Mod.MHJ A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  .] [", "TICK PARALYSIS, CANINE - USA: (COLORADO) **************************************** A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Wed 28 Jun 2017 6:27 PM Source: 9News [edited] Veterinarians say ticks are to blame for paralyzing a couple's dog after a camping trip to Boulder County. Bob and Voni Faus were camping in Nederland earlier this month [June 2017] when their 15-year-old dachshund, Bitz, was bitten by 2 Rocky Mountain wood ticks. About one week later, Bitz couldn't move. \"He was just crumpled in a pile against the wall,\" Voni says, \"I said, 'my God, we have to go to the emergency room right now.'\" Bitz suffered from canine tick paralysis, a rare but potentially fatal condition that renders dogs unable to move from the neck down. Rocky Mountain wood ticks and American dog ticks paralyze dogs. Both are common in Colorado. Only female ticks can cause paralysis by eventually affecting a dog's respiratory system, veterinarians say. At 1st, Bob and Voni had no idea Bitz was paralyzed because of a tick. Dachshunds are known for often having back problems. An emergency veterinarian said Bitz's paralysis likely stemmed from genetic issues. \"We were at the emergency veterinarian and this wasn't caught,\" Voni says. \"I really had lost all hope; I really had thought I was going to lose him.\" The couple detected the tick by accident while petting Bitz. The dog's condition returned to normal within 24 hours of removing the pests, veterinarians say. \"It's uncommon but it's really real and it's very devastating,\" the couple says. Dr Michelle Barron, an infectious disease expert with University of Colorado Hospital, says people with pets should be aware of the potential dangers of tick-borne illnesses. \"There are certainly things that are unique to Colorado that we wouldn't necessarily see outside,\" Dr Barron said, naming Rocky Mountain Spotted Fever and Colorado Tick Fever as 2 diseases that are generally exclusive to our state. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention say tick-borne illnesses may be more common this season than in years past because weather patterns have created the perfect breeding ground for ticks, drastically increasing their population this year [2017]. \"My vet had the exact same thing happen to another dog 3 weeks earlier,\" Voni says. The couple is experienced when it comes to camping and said they rarely have had tick encounters before. They checked Bitz for ticks and even gave him a bath after the camping trip. The Faus' highly recommend tick repellent for those venturing outdoors this summer. Here's a list of tips from experts about how to prevent tick bites on 9NEWS. [Byline: Jessica Oh] -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail [Tick paralysis has been long reported in humans. The female tick -- the culprit -- will be found in the nape of the neck, tucked in under the hair. In May this year [2017] there was a case of a young girl so afflicted in Oregon, see:  . Apparently canine tick paralysis is seen in parts of the Carolinas. - Mod.MHJ A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  .] [", "JAPANESE ENCEPHALITIS - CHINA (HONG KONG) ****************************************** A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Fri 30 Jun 2017 Source: 7th Space [edited] The Centre for Health Protection (CHP) of the Department of Health is investigating this evening [Fri 30 Jun 2017] a local case of Japanese encephalitis (JE) and again urged the public to avoid going to rural areas from dusk till dawn when the vector which breeds in large water bodies such as rice paddies is most active. The male patient, aged 38 with good past health, has developed fever and headache since 18 Jun [2017] and was admitted to Tuen Mun Hospital for management on 28 Jun [2017]. The clinical diagnosis was encephalitis and he has been in stable condition. His cerebrospinal fluid and blood samples tested positive for immunoglobulin M (IgM) antibodies against JE upon laboratory testing. Initial enquiries revealed that the patient had no travel history in the incubation period. He lives in Tin Shui (I) Estate, Tin Shui Wai. His home contacts have remained asymptomatic and been put under medical surveillance. \"We are working closely with the Food and Environmental Hygiene Department (FEHD) to assess and prevent any possible spread of infection. The FEHD and the Agriculture, Fisheries and Conservation Department have been informed for vector investigations, surveillance and control. Epidemiological investigations are ongoing,\" a spokesman for the CHP said. Officers of the CHP will conduct site visit and field investigations by questionnaire surveys at the patient's residence for active case finding and arranging blood tests. A health talk was held tonight jointly with the FEHD to deliver health advice to residents and the public. Persons who have been to the vicinity of Tin Shui Estate with JE symptoms should call the CHP's hotline (2125 1122) operating from 9 am to 6 pm this weekend [1-2 Jul 2017] for laboratory investigation or referral as appropriate. \"We have informed the Guangdong and Macau health authorities of the case and will issue letters to doctors and hospitals to alert them to the latest situation,\" the spokesman added. This is the 2nd JE case recorded in 2017 and the 1st case reported on 9 Jun [2017] has been classified as a locally-acquired infection; 2 (imported) and 2 (one local, one unclassified) cases were recorded in 2016 and 2015 respectively. JE is a mosquito-borne disease and JE virus is transmitted by the bite of infected mosquitoes. The principal vector is called _Culex tritaeniorhynchus_. JE mainly occurs in rural and agricultural areas of Asia and the Western Pacific. The infected mosquito transmits JE virus to humans and animals during biting. The mosquitoes breed where there is abundant water such as rice paddies and become infected by feeding on pigs and wild birds infected with JE virus. Symptoms usually start at around 4 - 14 days after being infected. To prevent JE, the public should take general measures to prevent mosquito bites and avoid going to rural areas from dusk till dawn when the mosquitoes are most active. Travellers to endemic areas should take special note. The public should: 1. Wear loose, light-coloured, long-sleeved tops and trousers, and use DEET-containing insect repellent on exposed parts of the body and clothing; 2. Take additional preventive measures in outdoor activities:  - Avoid using fragrant cosmetics or skin care products;  - Re-apply insect repellents according to instructions; 3. Special notes during travel:  - If going to affected areas, arrange consultation with a doctor at least 6 weeks before travel, and have extra preventive measures to avoid mosquito bite;  - During travel in endemic rural areas, carry a portable bed net and apply permethrin (an insecticide) on it. Permethrin should not be applied to skin.  - Seek medical attention promptly if feeling unwell; and  - Travellers feeling unwell, such as fever, should seek medical advice promptly, and provide travel details to doctor. -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail [Hong Kong is entering the JE virus transmission season. There have been sporadic cases of Japanese encephalitis virus (JEV) infection in Hong Kong in past years. The virus is endemic in large areas of Asia, including Japan and China. Because Hong Kong is well within the geographic distribution of JEV, it would not be surprising to see additional cases occur occasionally. Individuals living in, or traveling to, JEV endemic areas are well advised to follow precautions to avoid mosquito bites. A JEV vaccine is available in China, but there is a question concerning justification of massive campaigns in Hong Kong where clinical cases are very few. However, it does seem curious that no recommendation is given for vaccination of travelers going to areas of active JE virus transmission outside of Hong Kong. Maps of Hong Kong can be seen at and . - Mod.TY A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  .] [", "FOOT AND MOUTH DISEASE - INDIA (02): (MANIPUR), BOVINE, CAPRINE, SUSPECTED, REQUEST FOR INFORMATION *************************************************************************************************** A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Fri 23 Jun 2017 Source: E-Pao Manipur, source IT News [summarised, edited] The statement of Veterinary Department over the death of cattle in Twilang area has angered Twilang people who have claimed that nearly 100 cattle have already died of Foot-and-Mouth-Disease outbreak in the area. Village representatives of Twilang area came down to Kangpokpi today [Fri 23 Jun 2017] and met the Executive Member of ADC Sadar Hills and Veterinary Officials over the matter. BP Vikas Basnet, Executive Member (Veterinary) held a press meet at Kangpokpi DHQs. He pointed out that altogether around 88 cows including 2 goats have already died due to FMD at different places in the area till now. Basnet said that 33 cows in Irang Part-II, 47 cows in Wakotphai area, 6 cows in Chalwa and 2 goats in Gelbung have already died. He also said, \"Many more death of cattle has been reported from other places but we are yet to ascertain the exact number of death.\" Basnet continued that Veterinary Officer of SHADC Kangpokpi Dr John Meigai and his team have been stationed in the area since June 9 [2017] and they have also personally witnessed and verified the death of cattle owing to the outbreak of FMD in the area. Basnet also said that the outbreak of FMD is still spreading in the area in spite of the vaccination of over 1241 cattle by Veterinary Department of SHADC Kangpokpi under the supervision of Dr John Meigai, Veterinary Officer. The Executive Member also drew the attention of the state government to immediately send a sincere and responsible team in the area to examine the fatal situation so as to take up quick measures to control the disease from further spreading. Dr John Meigai said that he personally led a team in Twilang area as instructed on June 9 [2017] and confirmed the outbreak of the FMD while witnessing death of a few animals after 1/2 days. He added that the death of animals due to the disease began after June 9 [2017] and it has been spreading rapidly in the nearby areas. -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail [In a previous publication, dated 16 Jun 2017, Vikas Basnet said that \"the buffalo and cow were more particularly affected and they died after 2 to 3 days of suffering the disease while adding that the symptoms according to the veterinary team are high fever lasting 2 to 3 days, eating less due to painful lesions in the mouth, weight loss, low conception rates, reluctance to move or stand due to sore feet and/or lameness\". (see at  ). The described symptoms, if accurate, are compatible with FMD, but high mortality of adult animals due to FMD is rather unusual. In the absence of denominator, the mortality and case-fatality rates cannot be calculated. The diagnosis deserves confirmation by the State veterinary authorities, excluding other etiologies. - Mod.AS A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  .] [", "MENINGITIS - ROMANIA (02): (BRASOV) FATAL, NEISSERIA MENINGITIDIS IDENTIFIED **************************************************************************** A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases [1] Date: Wed 21 Jun 2017 Source: EpiCore Global Surveillance Project [edited] Re: ProMED-mail post Meningitis - Romania: (BV) bacterial, RFI http://promedmail.org/post/20170621.5120576 -------------------------------------------------------------------------------- [The pathogen that caused bacterial meningitis in] the patient who died was identified by latex agglutination [as] _Neisseria meningitidis_ ACWY. For the others, until now samples were negative. There is no official information so far. -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail ****** [2] Date: Thu 22 Jun 2017 Source: EpiCore Global Surveillance Project [edited] Re: ProMED-mail post Meningitis - Romania: (BV) bacterial, RFI http://promedmail.org/post/20170621.5120576 -------------------------------------------------------------------------------- A 17 years old male died one week ago in Brasov (Infectious Diseases Hospital) and the death was attributed to bacterial meningitis. Confirmation tests [have been] processed to find the strain but [no answers are as yet] provided. [Close] contacts with the deceased male were screened and provided chemoprophylaxis for bacterial meningitis and a bunch of cases were admitted to the hospital. The outbreak started following a graduation party that was held by the deceased person. An epidemiological investigation is ongoing these days in Brasov. -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail [ProMED-mail thanks the EpiCore Global Surveillance Project members for their responses. In combination with a clinical picture and cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) examination consistent with bacterial meningitis, a presumptive diagnosis of bacterial meningitis caused by _Neisseria meningitidis_ can be rapidly made on the basis of a Gram stain of the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) sediment or by detection of specific antigens in the CSF by a latex agglutination test (LAT)  . The LAT reagent consists of polystyrene latex particles that have been coated with antibodies specific for meningococcus serogroups A, C, Y and W135 antigens. These latex particles agglutinate in the presence of sufficient antigen in the CSF. No further information has become available for this outbreak in Brasov, Romania. Brasov is a city with a population of 253 200 residents in Romania and the administrative centre of Brasov County  . A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map of Romania can be accessed at . - Mod.ML] [", "VIBRIO VULNIFICUS - USA (04): (TEXAS) ************************************* A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Thu 29 Jun 2017, 3:19 PM Source: Corpus Christi Caller-Times [edited Reports of an Ingleside teacher infected with _Vibrio vulnificus_ while wade fishing near Rockport indicate the man is being treated at a Corpus Christi hospital. Other than this information, San Patricio County Health Director Dr. James Mobley said he only can confirm there is a pending case of _Vibrio_ and that it involves a serious infection. \"It's bad,\" he said. A science teacher has contracted the infection earlier this week and was being treated at Corpus Christi Medical Center-Doctors Regional Hospital, according to hospital officials. _Vibrio vulnificus_, often referred to as a flesh-eating bacterium, is naturally occurring in warm coastal waters around the world and is present in the Gulf of Mexico year-round. Levels of the microorganism are highest during warmer months. So far in 2017, reported cases of _Vibrio_ infections total 59, according to Christine Mann, with the Texas Department of Health and Human Services. Of those cases, 25 percent of the infections were blood borne from an open wound, 22 percent came from consuming raw shellfish and 44 percent are from an unknown or unreported cause, Mann said. _Vibrio_ cannot penetrate healthy skin. But if this insidious microbe enters the bloodstream through a break in the skin, the infection can spread rapidly and result in amputation or death. Immediate treatment is the most effective cure. The worst cases and nearly all deaths from _Vibrio_ usually involve high-risk patients who are elderly or with liver problems, diabetes, hepatitis, gastric disorders, cancer or steroid dependency; but not always. Alcoholism and a compromised immune system also are high risk factors. [Byline: David Sikes] -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail [The following is extracted from the \"Bad Bug Book,\" Center for Safety and Applied Nutrition, US FDA (Food and Drug Administration) at  : _Vibrio vulnificus_, a lactose-fermenting, halophilic, Gram-negative, opportunistic pathogen, is found in estuarine environments and associated with various marine species such as plankton, shellfish (oysters, clams, and crabs), and finfish. Environmental factors responsible for controlling numbers of _V. vulnificus_ in seafood and in the environment include temperature, pH, salinity, and amounts of dissolved organics. It may be normal flora in salt water, and acquiring this organism from shellfish or water exposure does not imply that the water is contaminated by sewage. Wound infections result either from contaminating an open wound with sea water harboring the organism, or by lacerating part of the body on coral, fish, etc., followed by contamination with the organism. The ingestion of _V. vulnificus_ by healthy individuals can result in gastroenteritis. The \"primary septicemia\" form of the disease follows consumption of raw seafood containing the organism by individuals with underlying chronic disease, particularly liver disease. The organism can also enter through damaged skin. In these individuals, the microorganism enters the blood stream, resulting in septic shock, rapidly followed by death in many cases (about 50 percent). Over 70 percent of infected individuals have distinctive bullous skin lesions (shown at  ). There are 2 points to be emphasized: that vibrios are normal flora in warm saltwater (not indicative of any sewage contamination) and that most of the life-threatening illnesses occur in individuals with underlying medical illnesses, including immunocompromised states, chronic liver disease, and diabetes. So-called normal individuals often just get gastroenteritis. The range of disease due to _V. vulnificus_ can involve more northern geographical areas if the area is affected by a substantial heat wave. - Mod.LL A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  .] [", "DOLPHIN DIE-OFF - RUSSIA: (BLACK SEA) ************************************* A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Thu 29 Jun 2017 Source: Kyiv Post, an Interfax-Ukraine report [edited] The number of dead dolphins washed up on the Black Sea beach, from Sochi to Anapa, has reached 167, Krasnodar Territory prosecutor Sergei Tabelsky said. \"Mass dolphin deaths have been registered beginning in March of this year [2017]. The highest number of animals washed up ashore was discovered in May [2017] (84 cases), in June [2017] (16 cases). Scientific organizations concluded that in 99 percent of cases, the mammals died not in the coastal areas of Krasnodar Territory. They were simply thrown ashore by the sea,\" Tabelsky said at a regional prosecutors' forum on local environmental safety issues on June 27 [2017]. The scientists who investigated mass dolphin deaths have yet to come to a unanimous opinion as to the causes of what happened, the prosecutor said. The investigation was carried out by 2 Crimean-based scientific organizations and Moscow's Severtsev Institute of Ecology. \"Some of the animals died after having entangled themselves in fishing nets, others from exhaustion, from virus infections, and various parasites. The specialists have so far been unable to establish a causal link in the dolphins' deaths,\" Tabelsky said. This diagnosis has been performed under the framework of the Catalonian Government's program for surveillance of marine mammal mortality. -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts [Normal mortality rates are not known for Black Sea populations of the harbour porpoise (_Phocoena phocoena_), short-beaked common dolphin (_Delphinus delphis_) and common bottlenose dolphin (_Turciops truncatus_), but these numbers appear to be high. The causes reported do not point at a single culprit. - Mod.PMB A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  .] [", "BOURBON VIRUS - USA: (MISSOURI) TICK-BORNE CASE *********************************************** A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Fri 30 Jun 2017, 8:48 AM Source: KY3 [edited] The Missouri Department of Health and Senior Services confirm it is aware of a case of Bourbon virus in the state. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention and the Missouri Department of Health and Senior Services his week [week ending 2 Jul 2017] began trapping and collecting ticks at Meramec State Park near Sullivan. They'll test them for any kind of tick-borne illness. Though Meramec State Park is an area of interest in the Bourbon virus investigation, the Missouri Department of Natural Resources says it has no information to suggest the potential exposure risk at the park is any greater than anywhere else in Missouri. Meramec Park and its facilities will remain open during the tick collection process. According to the Missouri Department of Natural Resources, this is only the 4th confirmed case of Bourbon virus in the country. The virus can be fatal but state officials won't confirm if this case killed someone. Bourbon virus was first discovered in 2014 in Bourbon County, Kansas, but not much is known about the disease. There is no specific test for Bourbon virus, and identifying it requires additional testing by the Centers for Disease Control. No vaccine is available. The virus is probably under-diagnosed because the symptoms are the same as any tick-transmitted disease. The 2 most common tick-borne diseases in Missouri are Rocky Mountain spotted fever and ehrlichiosis. \"All of these tick-borne illnesses start out similarly, with headache, fever, chills, sometimes nausea and vomiting and body aches,\" said Dr. John Brown, a Travel Medicine physician with Mercy Hospital. \"So all of those symptoms, especially in the summertime and especially if you've been outdoors around ticks, are very suspicious for a tick-borne illness.\" Officials collecting and testing ticks near Sullivan will look for Rocky Mountain Spotted Fever, ehrlichiosis and Bourbon virus. Since all 3 of those viruses present similar symptoms, Brown said quick diagnosis and quick supportive care are important. There are also things you can do to help prevent tick bites. First, be sure to use bug spray on your body. Brown says a product with at least a 30 percent concentration of DEET is recommended. Second, take the time to pre-treat your clothing before going outdoors. For clothing, be sure to use a product with permethrin. Spray all your clothing, shoes and other accessories thoroughly on both sides. Allow the clothing to dry. The spray will be good for up to three or four washings, and the treated clothing can be washed with other items. For an example on how to spray your clothing, watch Brown's demonstration in the video on this page. For more information on Bourbon virus and for Consumer Report's list for the most effective bug sprays, click on the links in the \"additional links\" box at the URL above. News release from Missouri Department of Health and Senior Services: -------------------------------------------------------------------- The Missouri Department of Health and Senior Services (DHSS) has been notified by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) that a Missouri resident has tested positive for Bourbon virus infection. The case did not involve any travel outside of the state, indicating that exposure occurred in Missouri. The Bourbon virus belongs to a group of viruses called _Thogotovirus_. Based on genetic similarities to other _Thogotovirus_, there is a possibility Bourbon virus is transmitted by ticks. Not much is known about the virus since it was first discovered in 2014 in Bourbon County, Kansas. DHSS staff, including local public health authorities, and the CDC are currently collecting ticks in Missouri for Bourbon virus testing. This will help to determine what the health risk is to people who are bitten by ticks. The CDC, with help from Missouri, Kansas and other states, is looking for additional patients who may be infected with the Bourbon virus. The investigation also involves laboratory scientists who are working to develop a test for the virus that can be used by doctors and laboratories. Known symptoms of Bourbon virus include fever, headache, body aches, rash and fatigue. Most people have a full recovery from tick-borne disease. However, DHSS statistics indicate that people over age 50 and those with chronic health problems are more likely to develop a serious illness that can lead to complications. Avoiding exposure to ticks is critical to the prevention of tick-borne disease. Beyond staying away from brushy areas and long grass where ticks hunt, the best practice to avoid tick bites is to use a repellent with a minimum of 20 percent DEET. Keeping lawns cut short and trimming shrubs and trees to increase sunlight can help make these areas less hospitable for ticks. People with outdoor pets should talk with their veterinarian about using an effective parasite prevention treatment. In addition to preventing bites, prompt removal of ticks can help prevent disease: - Using tweezers, grasp tick near its mouth and as close to your skin as possible. - Pull tick firmly, straight out, away from skin. Do not jerk or twist the tick. - Do NOT use alcohol, matches, liquid soap, or petroleum jelly to remove a tick. - Wash your hands and the bite site with soap and water after the tick is removed. Apply an antiseptic to the bite site. Bourbon virus testing is only available from CDC in certain circumstances and is still in the beginning stages of development. This means that testing must be approved by CDC, and other health conditions must be ruled out first. Providers with questions about Bourbon virus testing can contact DHSS at (573) 526-4780 or 800-392-0272 (24/7). For more information on the prevention of illnesses that are carried by ticks, please see the CDC website:  . [Byline: Kate Allt] -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts [Bourbon virus is a member of the _Thogotovirus_ genus of enveloped RNA viruses, one of 7 genera in the virus family _Orthomyxoviridae_. Their single-stranded, negative-sense RNA genome has 6 or 7 segments. Several related viruses have been identified in hard tick species; while it is unknown how Bourbon virus is transmitted, it is also assumed to be tick-borne because of seasonality of the disease and association with tick bites. As of 27 Jun 2017, a limited number of Bourbon virus disease cases have been identified in the Midwest and southern United States. Some people who have been infected later died. At this time, it is not known if the virus might be found in other areas of the United States. There is no information provided on the status of this newest patient and what his symptoms were. In general, the symptoms have been non-specific, including fever, tiredness, rash, headache, other body aches, nausea, and vomiting. They also had low blood counts for cells that fight infection and help prevent bleeding. Bourbon virus should be included in the differential when a patient presents with history of a tick bite and fever, leukopenia, and thrombocytopenia, and who does not respond to antibiotics. See Kosoy OI, Lambert AJ, Pastula DM et al. Novel Thogotovirus Associated with Febrile Illness and Death, United States, 2014. Emerg Infect Dis. 2015; 21(5):760-4. doi: 10.3201/eid2105.150150 (available at: , for further information on this tick-borne pathogen. A map of Missouri, United States can be found at  . - Mod.LK] [", "SALMONELLOSIS, SEROTYPE PARATYPHI B - BHUTAN: (THIMPHU) ******************************************************* A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Fri 30 Jun 2017 Source: Kuensel [edited] With 13 cases reported to the hospital, the Royal Centre for Disease Control (RCDC) concluded that there is a [para]typhoid outbreak in a private apartment building in Changzamtok, Thimphu. The affected people, aged 3.5 to 50 years, were mostly students and housewives. They complained of suffering from fever and headache. A microbiologist, Tshering Dorji, said that on [21 Jun 2017], RCDC was notified that 3 patients were diagnosed with _Salmonella [enterica serotype] Paratyphi B_ and one suspected in the Jigme Dorji Wangchuk National Referral Hospital (JDWNRH). All patients confirmed that they live in the same building in Changzamtok. A team, comprising a public health professional, clinical officer and laboratory personnel from RCDC, then investigated to check whether the same water source may lead to transmission of the disease to other residents and determine the risk factors of the outbreak for implementing evidence-based prevention and control measures. It was found out that it occurred from [5 to 23 Jun 2017]. The team also found out that the building was supplied with water from both a private source and City Corporation. A report issued by RCDC stated that laboratory testing found out the water supplied from the private water source was polluted. \"The drinking water should be free of an indicator of bacteria to be safe for consumption.\" The report also stated that it recommended the house owner to refrain from drinking water from the private source and to shield the reservoir tank with a tight lid to protect it from litter, sewer, and waste water. \"The tenants must drink boiled water and refrain from drinking water directly from the tap,\" the report recommended. \"City Corporation should reinforce the water supply regulation in the city and monitor its compliance.\" RCDC, the report states, should scale up water quality surveillance and provide health education on knowledge awareness of the paratyphoid fever and its prevention and control measures. Meanwhile, the residents of the building said the owner had to provide water from a private source because the water provided by City Corporation was not enough. A woman, who did not want to be named, said they boil water, but, because it is contagious, they also fall sick. The 1st patient was her 6-year-old son, and it spread to her father and husband. She said 2 people staying in the building are still in the hospital. [Byline: Tashi Dema] -- Communicated by: ProMED-SoAs [Although not specifically stated, the serotype here may be the d-tartrate-fermenting variant _S. enterica_ subspecies _enterica_ serovar Paratyphi B dT+ (sometimes referred to as _S._ Java). This organism has well-characterized animal reservoirs and has been involved in several outbreaks reported in ProMED-mail as noted below. The organism has been linked to human salmonellosis acquired from ornamental aquaria (Levings RS, Lightfoot D, Hall RM and Djordjevic SP. Aquariums as reservoirs for multidrug-resistant _Salmonella_ Paratyphi B. Emerg Infect Dis. 2006 Mar;12(3):507-10; available at  ). - Mod.LL A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  .] [", "AVIAN INFLUENZA (119): TOGO (MARITIME REGION) POULTRY, HPAI H5N1, OIE ********************************************************************* A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: 3 Jul 2017 Source: OIE, WAHID (World Animal Health Information Database), weekly disease information 2017; 30(27) [edited] Highly pathogenic avian influenza, Togo --------------------------------------- Information received on [and dated] 3 Jul 2017 from Dr Batawui Komla Batasse, Director of [Livestock and Fisheries, Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Breeding and Fisheries], Lome, Togo Summary Report type: immediate notification Date of start of the event: 7 Jun 2017 Date of confirmation of the event: 29 Jun 2017 Reason for notification: reoccurrence of a listed disease Date of previous occurrence: 7 Nov 2016 Manifestation of disease: clinical disease Causal agent: Highly pathogenic avian influenza virus Serotype: H5N1 Nature of diagnosis: clinical, laboratory (advanced), necropsy This event pertains to a defined zone within the country New outbreaks (1) Summary of outbreaks: Total outbreaks: 1 Outbreak 1: Maritime, Togo, Vo, [Maritime Region] Date of start of the outbreak: 7 Jun 2017 Outbreak status: continuing (or date resolved not provided) Epidemiological unit: farm Total animals affected: Species / Susceptible / Cases / Deaths / Killed and disposed of / Slaughtered Birds / 35 000 / 3600 / 3448 / 152/ 0 Affected population: Intensive layers farm. The farm is properly closed. Outbreak statistics [rates apparent, expressed as percentages] Species / Morbidity rate / Mortality rate / Case fatality rate / Proportion susceptible animals lost* Birds / 10.29 / 9.85 / 95.78 / 10.29 *Removed from the susceptible population through death, destruction, and/or slaughter Epidemiology Source of the outbreak(s) or origin of infection: unknown or inconclusive Epidemiological comments: nothing to report. Control measures Measures applied: movement control inside the country; surveillance within containment and/or protection zone; quarantine; official disposal of carcasses; by-products and waste; disinfection; slaughter; vaccination prohibited; no treatment of affected animals Measures to be applied: screening, traceability; official destruction of animals products; stamping out; control of wildlife reservoirs; zoning. Diagnostic test results Laboratory name and type / Species / Test / Test date / Result Central veterinary laboratory of Lome (national laboratory) / Birds / real-time PCR / 29 Jun 2017 / Positive Future reporting The event is continuing. Weekly follow-up reports will be submitted. [The location of the outbreak can be seen on the interactive map included in the OIE report at the source URL above.] -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail [According to the report published by FAO-EMPRES on \"Sub-Saharan Africa HPAI situation update\" (latest update on 7 Jun 2017), H5N1 has been confirmed in Burkina Faso, Cameroon, Cote d'Ivoire, Ghana, Niger, Nigeria and Togo. In Togo: - FAO provided preliminary assistance to the Veterinary Services for disease control. This included assistance in the establishment of response teams, drafting of a short term action plan, meeting with WHO, participation in a press conference with the Minister in charge of livestock, WHO, and MoH as well as preparation of daily sitreps. - Advanced genetic characterization of the virus identified in Togo confirmed that it belongs to clade 2.3.2.1.c., which is the same clade circulating also in other West and Central African countries. More detailed information is available at,  . - Mod.CRD A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  .] [", "DENGUE/DHF UPDATE (08): AMERICAS ******************************** A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases In this update: Cases in various countries: Americas regional --- Cases in various countries not mentioned above or more recent case numbers. Mexico and Central America --- Mexico - Jalisco state - Morelos state - Puebla state - Veracruz state South America --- Peru (Ica region) ****** Cases in various countries Americas --- Americas Regional WHO/PAHO report 23 Jun 2017 Reported cases of dengue fever in the Americas, by country or territory to EW 24 [week ending 16 Jun 2017]. Cases reported earlier than EW 20 are not included here, but are available at the above URL. -------------------------------------- Cases by Country / Week updated / Probable/ Conf. / Virus type / DHF severe / Deaths North America USA / 24 [week ending 16 Jun 2017] / 47 / 47 / D? / 0 / 0 Central America and Mexico Costa Rica / 23 [week ending 9 Jun 2017] / 1856 / 0 / D 1,2 / 0 / 0 El Salvador / 24 [week ending 16 Jun 2017] / 1794 / 45 / D? / 39 / 0 Honduras / 24 [week ending 16 Jun 2017] / 2679 / 0 / D? / 48 / 0 Mexico / 24 [week ending 16 Jun 2017] / 3782 / 1793 / D 1,2,3 / 477 / 3 Panama / 20 [week ending 19 May 2017] / 2471 / 844 / D 1,2 / 7 / 0 Hispanic Caribbean Dominican Republic / 23 [week ending 9 Jun 2017] / 502 / 0 / D? / 23 / 0 Puerto Rico / 23 [week ending 9 Jun 2017] / 9 / 9 / D2 / 0 / 0 English, French, Dutch Caribbean Aruba / 22 [week ending 2 Jun 2017] / 690 / 7 / D? / 0 / 0 Guadeloupe / 22 [week ending 2 Jun 2017] / 80 / 0 / D? / 0 / 0 Martinique / 22 [week ending 2 Jun 2017] / 18 / 0 / D? / 2 / 0 St, Bartolome / 22 [week ending 2 Jun 2017] / 24 / 0 / D? / 0 / 0 St. Martin / 22 [week ending 2 Jun 2017] / 82 / 8 / D? / 0 / 0 Andean Bolivia / 20 [week ending 19 May 2017] / 6668 / 0 / D? / 47 / 0 Colombia / 24 [week ending 9 Jun 2017] / 14 522 / 8357 / D? / 178 / 51 Ecuador / 23 [week ending 26 May 2017] / 8576 / 8576 / D? / 8 / 4 Peru / 24 [week ending 16 Jun 2017] / 61 981 / 18 057 / D 2,3 / 183 / 61 Southern Cone Argentina / 24 [week ending 16 Jun 2017] / 7028 / 249 / D1 / 0 / 0 Paraguay / 22 [week ending 02 Jun 2017] / 1036 / 265 / D? / 0 / 0 [Maps showing the location of the affected islands and countries in the Americas mentioned above and below can be accessed at  ; North America at ; Central America at ; Caribbean and South America at . - Mod.TY] Cases in various countries not mentioned above or more recent case numbers. Mexico and Central America --- Mexico: - Jalisco state. 26 Jun 2017. (registered) 134 cases. [in Spanish] - Morelos state. 27 Jun 2017. (susp.) 822 cases, (conf.) 74 cases; DHF/serious 1 case; Municipalities most affected: Cuautla, Cuernavaca, Jiutepec, Zacatepec, Tlaltizap\u00e1n. [in Spanish] - Puebla state. 30 Jun 2017. (registered) 56 cases. [in Spanish] - Veracruz state. 29 Jun 2017. (conf.) 198 cases.  [in Spanish] South America --- Peru (Ica region). 27 Jun 2017. (conf.) 1526 cases; Provinces most affected: Ica 562 cases; Chincha 107 cases; Nasca 152 cases; Palpa 409 cases; Pisco 299 cases. [in Spanish] -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail [", "AVIAN INFLUENZA (120): FRANCE (HAUTS-DE-FRANCE) HPAI H5N8, POULTRY, SPREAD ************************************************************************** A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Mon 3 Jul 2017 Source: The Poultry site [edited] France's agriculture ministry confirmed on [Fri 30 Jun 2017] a new case of bird flu on a poultry farm in the northern Brillon region, near the French-Belgian border. \"A case of highly contagious H5N8 bird flu was confirmed on [Fri 30 Jun 2017] on a poultry farm in Brillon,\" the ministry said in a statement. The affected poultry was located 15 km [approx. 9 mi] from a non-commercial farm in Tournai where 11 cases of avian flu have been detected in June [2017], the ministry added. \"To rapidly stop the virus' spread, protection and surveillance zones are set up immediately... In these areas, movement of all susceptible animals is prohibited and bio-security measures are reinforced,\" the ministry said. Earlier this year [2017], France, the main producer of famous foie gras in the European Union, slaughtered 600 000 ducks in its southwest region of Les Landes to prevent avian influenza contamination. Following a severe strain of H5N8 bird flu hitting several European countries in 2016, France has already imposed precautionary measures to prevent poultry contacts with wild birds and to restrict hunt in high risk areas. -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail [Since the start of the HPAI H5N8 event in France, reportedly on 25 Nov 2016, 484 outbreaks have been reported to the OIE, all of them in the south-west. The most recent follow-up report, No 31, was published on 19 Apr 2017. The summarized epidemiological data, as of 19 Apr 2017, were as follows: Total outbreaks : 484 (submitted) Species / Susceptible / Cases / Deaths / Destroyed / Slaughtered Birds / 1 508 102/ 15 900 / 16 727 / 1 293 565 / 0 The full details from the accumulated reports, and the 484 locations on a map, are available at  . Brillon, the site of the current outbreak, is situaued in north-east France, close to the Belgian border (map at  ). This is the 1st H5N8 event outside the infected territory in the south-west. Belgium has recently suffered its 1st HPAI H5N8 event (http://promedmail.org/post/20170619.5116301, http://promedmail.org/post/20170603.5081763). Subscribers may wish to visit the French overview \"Epidemiological status of HPAI viruses from the clade 2.3.4.4. in Europe since October 2016: situation point on 19 Jun 2017,\" which includes several useful maps and figures, available at  . - Mod.AS A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  .] [", "TRYPANOSOMIASIS, ARGENTINA: (SANTA FE) BOVINE, FIRST REPORT, OIE **************************************************************** A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: 30 Jun 2017 Source: OIE, WAHID (World Animal Health Information Database), weekly disease information 2017; 30(27) [edited] Trypanosomosis, Argentina ------------------------- Information received on [and dated] 30 Jun 2017 from Dr Jorge Horacio Dillon, Presidente, Servicio Nacional de Sanidad y Calidad Agroalimentaria (SENASA), Ministerio de Agricultura, Ganader\u00eda y Pesca, Buenos Aires, Argentina Summary Report type: Immediate notification Date of start of the event: 7 Apr 2017 Date of confirmation of the event: 22 May 2017 Report date: 30 Jun 2017 Reason for notification: 1st occurrence of a listed disease Manifestation of disease: clinical disease Causal agent: _Trypanosoma vivax_ Nature of diagnosis: clinical, laboratory (basic and advanced) This event pertains to the whole country New outbreaks: 4 Outbreak 1 (4): San Cristobal, Santa Fe Date of start of the outbreak: 7 Apr 2017 Outbreak status: resolved on 16 Jun 2017 Epidemiological unit: farm Total animals affected: Species / Susceptible / Cases / Deaths / Killed and disposed of / Slaughtered Cattle / 527 / 27 / 27 / 0 / 0 Outbreak 2 (1): Castellanos, Santa Fe Date of start of the outbreak: 10 Apr 2017 Outbreak status: resolved on 8 May 2017 Epidemiological unit: farm Total animals affected: Species / Susceptible / Cases / Deaths / Killed and disposed of / Slaughtered Cattle / 722 / 70 / 16 / 0 / 0 Affected population: Dairy production premises. The affected cows were lactating. Outbreak 3 (2): Castellanos, Santa Fe Date of start of the outbreak: 15 Apr 2017 Outbreak status: resolved on 8 May 2017 Epidemiological unit: farm Total animals affected: Species / Susceptible / Cases / Deaths / Killed and disposed of / Slaughtered Cattle / 440 / 40 / 12 / 0 / 0 Outbreak 4 (3): San Cristobal, Santa Fe Date of start of the outbreak: 20 Apr 2017 Outbreak status: resolved on 21 Jun 2017 Epidemiological unit: farm Total animals affected: Species / Susceptible / Cases / Deaths / Killed and disposed of / Slaughtered Cattle / 661 / 33 / 33 / 0 / 0 Summary of outbreaks Total outbreaks: 4 Total animals affected: Species / Susceptible / Cases / Deaths / Killed and disposed of / Slaughtered Cattle / 2350 / 170 / 88 / 0 / 0 Outbreak statistics [rates apparent, expressed as percentages] Species / Morbidity rate / Mortality rate / Case fatality rate / Proportion susceptible animals lost* Cattle / 7.23 / 3.74 /51.76 / 3.74 *Removed from the susceptible population through death, destruction and/or slaughter Epidemiology Source of the outbreak(s) or origin of infection: Unknown or inconclusive, Vectors Epidemiological comments: Tsetse flies are not present in the country; it is thought that the transmission occurred through other hematophagous flies (horsefly or _Stomoxys_ sp.), which explains the limited spreading of the disease and epidemiological impact. The investigation carried out to identify the origin of those outbreaks revealed the existence of unofficial registers related to the possible detection of the agent in the provinces of Chaco and Formosa in the past. The presence of the agent in these areas could have been hidden by the existence of endemic diseases with indistinguishable symptomatology, such as babesiosis and anaplasmosis. We will attempt to clarify this point in order to integrate this information within next periodic reports. Control measures Measures applied: movement control inside the country; traceability; quarantine; control of vectors; vaccination permitted ( if a vaccine exists); treatment of affected animals (Dimenazeno) Measures to be applied: no other measures Diagnostic test results Laboratory name and type / Species / Test / Test date / Result Investigation and transfer center of Formosa (Local laboratory) / Cattle / polymerase chain reaction (PCR) / 22 May 2017 / Positive Future reporting The event is continuing. Weekly follow-up reports will be submitted. [The location of the outbreak can be seen on the interactive map included in the OIE report at the source URL above.] -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail [\"Tsetse-transmitted trypanosomiasis is a disease complex caused by several species of protozoan parasites of the genus _Trypanosoma_, mainly transmitted cyclically by the genus _Glossina_ (tsetse flies), but also transmitted mechanically by several biting flies (tabanids, stomoxes, etc.). The disease can affect various species of mammals but, from an economic point of view, tsetse-transmitted trypanosomiasis, is particularly important in cattle. It is mainly caused by _Trypanosoma congolense_, _T. vivax_ and, to a lesser extent, _T. brucei brucei_. \"Clinical signs of tsetse-transmitted trypanosomiasis may include intermittent fever, edema, abortion, decreased fertility and emaciation. Anemia usually develops in affected animals and is followed by loss of body condition, reduced productivity and often mortality. Post-mortem signs may include emaciation, enlarged lymph nodes, enlarged liver and spleen, excessive fluid in the body cavities, and petechial hemorrhages. In animals that died during the chronic phase of the disease, the lymphoid organs are usually no longer enlarged and severe myocarditis is a common finding. Neither clinical nor post-mortem signs of tsetse-transmitted trypanosomiasis are pathognomonic. Therefore, diagnosis must rely on direct techniques that confirm the presence of trypanosomes either by microscopic visualization or by indirect serological techniques or by polymerase chain reaction (PCR). \"Clinically, trypanosomiasis can be confused with babesiosis, anaplasmosis, theileriosis, hemonchosis and even ehrlichiosis, rabies or plant intoxications. Differential diagnosis is oriented by clinical observations, evolution, epidemiological context, but it is essentially based on laboratory diagnosis.\" For the above and additional background information, including diagnostic methods and references, please refer to the OIE Terrestrial Manual 2017, Chapter 2.4.17, Trypanosomiasis ( tsetse- transmitted) at  . \"Trypanosomes can be found wherever the tsetse fly vector exists. Tsetse flies are endemic in Africa between latitude 15 deg N and 29 deg S, from the southern edge of the Sahara desert to Zimbabwe, Angola and Mozambique. Trypanosomes, particularly _T. vivax_, can spread beyond the \"tsetse fly belt\" by transmission through mechanical vectors. _T. vivax_ is also found in South and Central America and the Caribbean, areas free of the tsetse fly.\"  . - Mod.CRD A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  .] [", "EQUINE INFECTIOUS ANEMIA - NETHERLANDS: (UTRECHT) FIRST REPORT, OIE ******************************************************************* A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Tue 4 Jul 2017 Source: OIE, WAHID [edited] Equine infectious anaemia, Netherlands ---------------------------------- Information received on 4 Jul 2017 from Dr. Christianne Bruschke, Chief Veterinary Officer, Ministry of Economic Affairs, Ministry of Economic Affairs, The Hague, Netherlands Summary Report type: immediate notification Date of start of the event: 28 Jun 2017 Date of confirmation of the event: 3 Jul 2017 Reason for notification: 1st occurrence of a listed disease in the country Causal agent: equine infectious anaemia virus Nature of diagnosis: laboratory (basic and advanced) This event pertains a defined zone within the country. New outbreaks (1) Summary of outbreaks: Total outbreaks: 1 Outbreak 1 (EIA 2017-01): Vreeland, Utrecht Date of start of the outbreak: 28 Jun 2017 Outbreak status: continuing (or date resolved not provided) Epidemiological unit: farm Affected animals: Species / Susceptible / Cases / Deaths / Killed and disposed of / Slaughtered Equidae / 63 / 1 / 0 / 1 / 0 Outbreak statistics [rates apparent, expressed as percentages] Species / Morbidity rate / Mortality rate / Case fatality rate / Proportion susceptible animals lost* Equidae / 1.59 / 0 / 0 / 1.59 *Removed from the susceptible population through death, destruction, and/or slaughter Epidemiology Source of the outbreak(s) or origin of infection: unknown or inconclusive Control measures Measures applied: screening, traceability, quarantine; selective killing and disposal, vaccination prohibited; no treatment of affected animals Measures to be applied: no other measures Diagnostic test results: Laboratory name and type / Species / Test / Test date / Result Wageningen Bioveterinary Research, Lelystad (National laboratory) / Equidae / agar-gel precipitation (AGP) test / 3 Jun 2017 / Positive Future reporting The event is continuing. Weekly follow-up reports will be submitted. [The location of the outbreak can be seen on the interactive map included in the OIE report at the source URL above.] -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail [According to a press release issued by the Dutch Food Safety Authority (NVWA), dated on 4 Jul 2017, the infected animal is a polo horse. Epidemiological investigations were initiated to try to identify the source of infection, including an investigation of contact horses which might spread the infection further, including at polo games in which the infected horse had participated. [Thanks to Sabine Zentis for the following link  .] Interestingly, some of the horses recently found to be EIA-infected in Germany were also polo horses; see ProMED-mail posting http://promedmail.org/post/20170629.5137416. The following text was extracted from the introduction of an article titled \"Equine infectious anaemia in Europe: Time to re-examine the efficacy of monitoring and control protocols?\" published on 23 Jul 2015 in Equine Veterinary Journal. The complete document and references are available at  . \"... Equine infectious anaemia [EIA] outbreaks have been reported in Belgium, Bosnia, Croatia, France, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Ireland, Italy, Latvia, Romania, Serbia, Slovenia and the UK between 2007 and 2014. In countries where EIA re-emerged after several years of absence such as in Belgium, Germany, Ireland and the UK, epidemiological studies suggested that equine biological products (such as blood plasma) imported from Italy or Romania were the source of the outbreaks. Moreover, several European countries (including Hungary, Poland and Serbia) have recently reported new EIA outbreaks and cases, underlining a wider extent of the disease in Europe than previously reported. Recent outbreaks of EIA in European Union (EU) countries have prompted a closer look at the disease and alternative routes of transmission. Traditionally, EIA is seen as a blood-borne disease that can be mechanically transmitted by various blood-feeding insects, mainly Tabanidae. However, human actions (either iatrogenic or not) are suggested to have been an important contributory element, especially in recent outbreaks like the one in Ireland in 2006. In at least some of the EIA cases in the Irish outbreak (16 out of 38), it has been hypothesised that infection might have occurred through aerosolisation of infectious particles as a result of cleaning with pressure washers. A few European nations reported EIA to the OIE between 2013 and 2014, namely Bosnia, Croatia, Hungary, Italy, Latvia, Romania and Serbia. Two of these countries had ongoing (Romania) or have initiated (Italy in 2007) active surveillance programmes for EIA including systematic yearly testing of equids. Equine infectious anaemia is reported as endemic in the 2 EU countries that use systematic serological testing (Italy and Romania)...\" Reference: Bolfa, P., Barbuceanu, F., Leau, S.-E. and Leroux, C. (2016), Equine infectious anaemia in Europe: Time to re-examine the efficacy of monitoring and control protocols?. Equine Vet J, 48: 140-142. doi:10.1111/evj.12466. EIA virus is not considered a risk for human health. - Mods.CRD/AS A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  .] [", "CHIKUNGUNYA (22) - AMERICAS, ASIA ********************************* A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases In this update: Cases in various countries: Regional summaries --- Americas --- Regional summary WHO/PAHO report Mexico and Central America --- Mexico (Jalisco state) Asia --- Taiwan (Tainan) India: - Ludhiana, Punjab - Chandigarh, Haryana and Punjab states ****** Cases in various countries: Regional summaries --- Americas --- WHO/PAHO report 30 Jun 2017 Reported cases of chikungunya fever in the Americas, by country or territory - 2017 to EW 26 [week ending 30 Jun 2017]. Cases before EW 23 are not given but are available at the above URL. -------------------------------------------------------------------------------- Cases by Country / Week / Local Susp. / Local Conf. / Imported Conf. / Deaths North America --- Mexico / week 24 [week ending 16 Jun 2017] / 0 / 17 / 0 / 0 USA / week 25 [week ending 23 Jun 2017] / 0 / 0 / 13 / 0 Central American Isthmus --- Costa Rica / week 23 [week ending 9 Jun 2017] / 172 / 0 / 0 / 0 El Salvador / week 24 [week ending 16 Jun 2017] / 308 / 0 / 0 / 0 Nicaragua / week 25 [week ending 23 Jun 2017] / 462 / 8 / 0 / 0 Latin Caribbean --- Puerto Rico / week 23 [week ending 09 Jun 2017] / 0 / 8 / 0 / 0 Andean Area --- Bolivia / week 25 [week ending 23 Jun 2017] / 3056 / 22 / 0 / 0 Colombia / week 24 [week ending 16 Jun 2017] / 637 / 7 / 0 / 0 Ecuador / week 23 [week ending 9 Jun 2017] / 0 /155 / 0 / 0 Peru / week 23 [week ending 9 Jun 2017] / 821 / 361 / 0 / 0 Southern Cone [no recent reports of cases] -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail [Maps showing the location of the affected islands and countries mentioned above and below can be accessed at  ; North America at ; Central America at ; Caribbean and South America at . - Mod.TY] Cases in various countries not mentioned above or with more recent case numbers. Mexico and Central America --- Mexico (Jalisco state). 26 Jun 2017. (registered) 2 cases. [in Spanish] Asia --- Taiwan (Tainan). 28 Jun 2017. (conf.) 1 case ex Philippines. [Maps of Taiwan can be seen at  and  and a map of the Philippines at:  . - Mod.TY] India: - Ludhiana, Punjab. 30 Jun 2017. (reported) 2nd case since 14 Jun 2017. [Maps of India can be accessed at  and at  . - Mod.TY] - Chandigarh, Haryana and Punjab states. 30 Jun 2017. (reported) 66 cases. [Increased by 6 cases in the past week. - Mod. TY] -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail [", "HAND, FOOT & MOUTH DISEASE UPDATE (07) - MEXICO *********************************************** A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Fri 30 Jun 2017 Source: Debate [in Spanish, trans. KS, edited] Coxsackie virus disease lasts between 7 and 10 days, but besides that there is no specific treatment; the important thing is to control the fever. The health departments in Tlaxcala, Oaxaca, Hidalgo, Estado de M\u00e9xico, Quer\u00e9taro, Zacatecas and Tamaulipas issued a health alert due to detecting outbreaks of coxsackie, a virus that poses no risk if detected early. Alfredo Gobera Farro, secretary of Health in Quer\u00e9taro, explains that coxsackie is a virus that mainly affects babies and children under 5 years of age. The disease is frequent because it is common for children to put their hands or feet in their mouths, which -- if the virus is present in their body -- causes sores or pimples around the lips and other parts of the body that have contacted with the saliva. Symptoms such as high fever, general malaise, and sore throat may occur; the average age of infection is 2 years old and it is transmitted in places of high coexistence, such as daycare centers. The disease tends to last between 7 and 10 days, but there is no specific treatment except to try to control the fever. \"The virus can spread, even when there are no symptoms, through feces, from diaper changes and respiratory secretions. The contagion occurs in the first 3 days of contact and then the symptoms appear,\" said the Secretary of Health. They also warn that the disease can be confused with the common cold, flu or stomach infections, as it manifests with flu-like symptoms. Recommendations --------------- Among the recommendations issued by health authorities are: - frequent hand washing and the use of individual cutlery; - shared toys such as in day-care centers should be disinfected regularly because the virus can live on these objects for several days; - avoid kissing others; - sneeze into your [tissue or handkerchief]; - and go to the doctor with any symptoms; - avoid self-medication and notify childcare organizations, so that preventive measures can be taken to avoid further spread of the disease, especially to family members and childcare workers. Once treated, symptoms should disappear in a week and there is little risk of morbidity or mortality, as long as symptoms are promptly treated, the authorities state. Highest number of cases ----------------------- In Mexico, the region with the highest number of registered cases is Tlaxcala (about 100), where the Ministry of Health (Sesa) promoted training for the population in general, nursery managers and educational institutions, to identify signs and symptoms. The Secretary of Health in Tlaxcala, Alberto Jonguitud Falc\u00f3n, reported that the patients are mainly inhabitants of the municipalities of Apizaco, Tlaxcala and Chiautempan. He explained that the State Commission for the Protection against Health Risks (Coeprist) supervises the chlorination and disinfection of water tanks and cisterns; \"We have carried out an exhaustive verification of the educational establishments and also verified chlorination in the water wells of localities that register cases.\" In the Mixteca region of Oaxaca, where approximately 80 cases have been reported, education authorities have asked parents and school authorities to be alert. Hidalgo is the state with the 3rd-highest number of cases, reporting 61. The public policy director of the Health Ministry, Concepci\u00f3n Carmona Ramos, said the outbreak has been concentrated in the central area, including the regions of Pachuca, Mineral de la Reforma, Tizayuca and the Tula-Tepeji, among others. She emphasized that since it is not a disease subject to epidemiological surveillance, a comparison with other years cannot be made; however, it is clear that its prevalence has increased in 2017. The official commented that, as schoolchildren are the most affected, there is constant coordination with the Ministry of Public Education, to carry out case control and surveillance. The State of Mexico has registered 40 cases, including 20 in Quer\u00e9taro, 5 in Tamaulipas, and 3 in Zacatecas. The 1st outbreak was detected in the United States. The coxsackie virus is named after the city of Coxsackie, New York, where it was 1st discovered, although there are no data from the time when this occurred. Infections occur throughout the year, but in colder climates, outbreaks of coxsackie virus occur more often in summer and fall. -- Communicated by: Kathryn Soderholm [Coxsackie virus A16 is the most common cause of hand, foot, and mouth disease (HFMD) in the United States, but other coxsackieviruses can also cause the illness. The virus is a member of the family _Picornaviridae_, genus _Enterovirus_, which also includes polioviruses, echoviruses, and enteroviruses. Coxsackie virus is highly contagious. Oral ingestion is the main source of infection and HFMD. The illness spreads by person-to-person contact with an infected person's nasal secretions or throat discharge, saliva, fluid from blisters, stool, respiratory droplets sprayed into the air after a cough or sneeze. Good hygiene must be maintained as the virus persists on surfaces for several days and infected individuals may shed virus for several weeks. Fortunately, the disease is generally self-limited. Information on these non-polio enteroviruses can be found at  . More information on HFMD is also available in Spanish at the URL above. A Healthmap of Mexico can be found at  - Mod.LK] [", "AMEBIC MENINGOENCEPHALITIS, PRIMARY - PAKISTAN (02): (SINDH) FATAL ****************************************************************** A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Mon 3 Jul 2017 Source: Business recorder [edited] Sindh health department has confirmed the 1st naegleria induced death of the year [2017] in Karachi claiming that concerned authorities have been approached to ensure proper treatment, with major focus on adequate chlorination of the water supplied to the citizens. Dr. Zafar Mehdi, provincial health department's focal person talking to APP here on [Mon 3 Jul 2017] said that a resident of Gulberg died of the infection recently. Naegleria or the \"brain eating amoeba\" infection is caused due to amoebas found in untreated municipal water, untreated well water, untreated swimming pools and spas as well as in warm lakes and mud puddles, etc. Current showers and standing water on lanes and roads enhances the risk as the amoeba thrives in warm and polluted water, said senior medical practitioner Dr. Ahsan Samad. Dr. Zafar Mehdi, however, claimed that needed measures were being adopted for naegleria prevention and control and that all possible sources in local context were being made for health safety of the public. \"Our focus is not only on municipal water but equal attention is also being paid towards swimming pools, spas as well as water parks,\" he said adding that rain water has been largely drained out from different parts of the metropolis. \"The idea is to ensure that people are in no way exposed to non-chlorinated or inadequately chlorinated water,\" emphasized the health department's focal person, reiterating that the peculiar virus cannot survive in properly treated water. In reply to a question, he agreed that urgent measures were needed for proper chlorination of water supplied to the Karachiites with equal attention towards adequate treatment of water that is used for bathing, face washing, swimming. \"In a nutshell water that can in any manner enter into nostrils of the water users has to be treated and safe to use,\" said the health department's focal person. About the committee constituted by the government to ensure regular verification of chlorine level in the essential commodity available in the metropolis, he said it is being reactivated. Dr Zafar Mehdi said KWSB and all other concerned departments have been approached for the purpose. [Byline: Parvez Jabri] -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail [Please refer to the comment in the 3 Sep 2014 ProMED-mail posting of a similar case from Pakistan (archive no http://promedmail.org/post/20140903.2746573), which describes \"the religious rite of ablution included in Yogic, Ayurvedic, and Islamic traditions. Within the Islamic faith, ritual nasal rinsing is included in a cleansing process called wudu, or ablution. It is usually performed several times a day in preparation for prayer, according to CDC. The deadly parasite has also been contracted via the use of neti pots. These practices where water is introduced into the sinuses is an obvious route of infection with _Naegleria fowleri_.\" It has not been proven that chlorination of water reduces risk and cases are usually infected in lakes and rivers, and infection through piped water supplies has not been documented. - Mod.EP A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  .] [", "PLAGUE, ANIMAL - USA (09): (TEXAS) PRAIRIE DOG, ALERT ***************************************************** A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Mon 3 Jul 2017 Source: Outbreak News Today [edited] Muleshoe National Wildlife Refuge near Muleshoe, Texas, is informing the public that plague has been confirmed on the Refuge and is currently confined to 2 populations of prairie dogs. For public safety, Paul's Lake and the access road to the lake are temporarily closed to all public access. Plague is widespread across the western United States and outbreaks are fairly common. Caused by a bacterium called _Yersinia pestis_, plague can be transmitted from animal to animal and from animal to human by the bites of infective fleas. \"To protect our visitors, we have voluntarily closed the area where plague has been found. It is well marked and we are asking the public to respect all signs and closures for their own safety,\" stated Refuge Manager Jude Smith. \"We understand this closure may be an inconvenience to our visitors, however we expect this outbreak to pass fairly soon.\" The Refuge is safe to visit and continues to welcome visitors. There are additional ways the public can protect themselves and their pets: - Keep pets leashed and use flea powder or a flea collar. - People should avoid animals with fleas and not camp or rest near animal burrows. - Do not touch wild, sick, or dead animals. - Wear insect repellant when outdoors. Plague is rare, but can be a serious disease if contracted by humans. -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts [Plague is primarily a disease of wild rodents. It is caused by the bacterium _Yersinia pestis_ which is mainly spread by the bites of infectious fleas. The bacterium is not native to North America. When it was introduced, it became established in some rodent populations, with prairie dogs one of the main species contributing to its maintenance. Humans are at risk of becoming infected if they are exposed to rodent fleas. - Mod.PMB A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  .] [", "CONJUNCTIVITIS - BONAIRE ************************ A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: 4 Jul 2017 From: Harry Vennema [edited] On several of the Caribbean islands, epidemics of viral conjunctivitis are ongoing. Recently, general practitioners in the overseas territories of the Netherlands reported an increased incidence of this syndrome. As of 26 May 2017, an outbreak of conjunctivitis occurred in a nursing home on Bonaire. In total, 14 patients and 13 healthcare workers presented with conjunctivitis. Patients were between 71 to 94 years of age. The number of new cases peaked in week 20 through 22. After week 22, a significant reduction was seen (1-3 new cases per week). Initially, conjunctival swabs from 5 patients were tested for the presence of adenovirus by PCR; all 5 were negative. Subsequently, swabs from 4 patients were analyzed for the presence of enterovirus by RT-PCR, and all 4 were positive. The enterovirus from 3 samples was further characterized by partial VP1 sequence analysis. In all 3 samples, the enterovirus was characterized as Coxsackievirus A24, which belongs to Enterovirus C. Coxsackievirus A24 has been identified frequently as the causative agent of epidemic viral conjunctivitis. The strain from Bonaire is at least 5 percent different from any of the previously isolated and sequenced CV-A24 strains available in Genbank in a 330nt VP1 fragment. The strain involved in the most recent outbreak of CV-A24 conjunctivitis on La Reunion in 2015 is 6 percent different from the Bonaire 2017 strain. [Andert Rosingh, Yingbin Celestijn-Wu, Fundashon Mariadal Hospital, Clinical Microbiology, Kralendijk, Bonaire, Caribbean Netherlands Annelies Riezebos, University Medical Centre Utrecht, Medical Microbiology, Utrecht, Netherlands Harry Vennema, Kim Benschop, Johan Reimerink, Hans van den Kerkhof, National Institute for Public Health and the Environment, Centre for Infectious Disease Control, Bilthoven, Netherlands] -- Harry Vennema National Institute for Public Health and the Environment Centre for Infectious Disease Control Bilthoven, Netherlands [ProMED thanks Harry Vennema and colleagues for this report. Acute hemorrhagic conjunctivitis (AHC) is characterized by sudden onset of painful, swollen, red eyes with subconjunctival hemorrhages and excessive tearing. Most cases are self-limited but highly contagious, with the potential for causing considerable illness. Adenoviruses and picornaviruses can cause AHC outbreaks (1). Among picornaviruses, enterovirus 70 and coxsackievirus A24 variant (CA24v) have caused large outbreaks of AHC[2]. Coxsackieviruses are transmitted primarily via the fecal-oral route and respiratory aerosols, although transmission via fomites is possible. The viruses initially replicate in the upper respiratory tract and the distal small bowel. They have been found in the respiratory tract up to 3 weeks after initial infection and in feces up to 8 weeks after initial infection[3]. The potential for exponential spread is, therefore, quite considerable. It is important to understand that sequential outbreaks of AHC due to CA24v might occur in the same location after a considerable period, and public health precautions are necessary to control these outbreaks. References: 1. Hierholzer JC, Hatch MH. Acute hemorrhagic conjunctivitis. In: Darrell RW, editor. Viral diseases of the eye. Philadelphia: Lea & Febiger; 1985. p. 165-96. 2. Kono R. Apollo 11 disease or acute hemorrhagic conjunctivitis: a pandemic of a new enterovirus infection of the eyes. Am J Epidemiol. 1975;101:383-90. 3. .  - Mod.UBA A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  .] [", "EQUINE INFECTIOUS ANEMIA - CANADA (02): (MANITOBA) ************************************************** A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: 2 Jul 2017 Source: Canadian Cattlemen [edited] A viral horse disease that's more prevalent further west in Canada has returned to Manitoba for the 1st time in recent memory, as horses from 2 municipalities have been found with the virus in the past 4 weeks. Equine infectious anemia (EIA) was confirmed in horses from a property in the RM of St. Clements, north of Winnipeg, in early June 2017, followed weeks later by a horse in the RM of Armstrong, in Manitoba's Interlake region, according to a report from the Manitoba Horse Council. The Equine Disease Communication Center, an arm of the American Association of Equine Practitioners, has reported the Armstrong horse was sampled as part of an investigation by the Canadian Food Inspection Agency into cases in St. Clements. The latter probe also includes a horse that had been moved to a breeding operation in Saskatchewan. A federally reportable disease in Canada since 1971, EIA is a \"potentially fatal\" viral disease affecting horses and other equines such as donkeys and mules, with no human health risk, according to CFIA. The disease has a history in Manitoba dating back to 1881, with the 1st recorded case in Canada, when it went by the name \"swamp fever.\" However, the vast majority of Canada's cases in the past 20 years have been in horses in Saskatchewan, Alberta and British Columbia, and no cases have been reported in Manitoba in recent years. Apart from Manitoba's new cases, EIA cases in 2017 have also been reported in the RMs of Torch River and Kinistino in northeastern Saskatchewan, at Mascouche in Quebec and in Beaver County southeast of Edmonton [Alberta]. Most EIA-infected horses show no clinical signs of disease but will be carriers of the virus for life and can be a source of infection for susceptible animals. Foals infected with EIA before birth are often aborted, or die within 2 months of birth. In infected horses, the virus' incubation period can range from one week to 3 months, with symptoms including anorexia, depression, general weakness, intermittent fever, jaundice, small hemorrhages under the tongue and eye, swelling of the extremities, and weight loss. In some cases, according to CFIA, a loss of coordination may be the only clinical sign. Infected animals show temporary recovery from the severe stage of EIA and may even appear normal for 2-3 weeks before relapsing with similar but less severe signs, CFIA said. Episodes of clinical illness are often associated with use of steroids or with periods of stress, such as hard work, hot weather, racing, or pregnancy. Horses or other equines confirmed with EIA are then either ordered destroyed by the CFIA or undergo lifelong quarantine. EIA is transmitted mainly by transfer of contaminated blood from one animal to another, such as through horse flies, stable flies or deer flies, or when blood-contaminated objects such as needles or surgical tools are used on more than one animal. It can also be transmitted via semen from an infected stallion. The disease so far has no cure, CFIA said, or any vaccine to prevent an animal from becoming infected. -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail [To quote the Merck Manual: \"All equids shipped across state lines in the USA [and presumably between Canadian Provinces] must be tested for EIA with a negative result within 12 months before transport. All equids sold, traded, or donated within a state must have tested negative for EIA no more than 12 months before change in ownership and, preferably, no more than 60-90 days. All equids entering horse auctions or sales markets are required to have a negative test before sale, or the horse must be held in quarantine within the state until the test results are known. It is recommended that horse owners implement an EIA control plan for their premises. All horses should be tested every 12 months as part of a routine health program. More frequent testing may be indicated in areas that perennially have a high incidence of EIA. Owners of equids entering shows or competitive events should present proof to event officials of a negative EIA test. All new equids introduced to a herd should have a negative EIA test before entry or be isolated while tests are pending. Vector control practices, including application of insecticides and repellents and environmental insect control, should be implemented. Good hygiene and disinfection principles should be maintained to prevent iatrogenic infection of horses with contaminated needles, syringes, or equipment.\" This is an expensive infectious disease spread by hemophagic insects. \"Under natural conditions, the most important mode of transmission of EIA is by the transfer of virus-infective blood by blood-feeding insects between horses in close proximity. Virus is found free in the plasma or is cell-associated, principally in monocytes and macrophages of infected animals. Although infection is considered primarily blood borne, all tissues and body fluids are potentially infectious, especially during episodes of clinical disease when viral burdens are high. Transmission of EIA by biting flies is purely mechanical; the virus does not replicate in the vector. The chance of transmission of EIA is directly proportional to the volume of blood retained on the mouthparts of the insect after feeding. In that respect, horse flies, deer flies, and to a lesser extent, stable flies are likely the most efficient vectors. It is also because they are capable of triggering host defensive behavior that interrupts feeding and results in their seeking a new susceptible host to complete their blood meal.\" But don't forget bloody needles. - Mod.MHJ A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  .] [", "LEGIONELLOSIS - USA (11): (FLORIDA) FITNESS GYMS ************************************************ A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Mon 3 Jul 2017 Source: Orlando Sentinel [edited] A 2nd LA Fitness gym has tested positive for [_Legionella_], the bacteria that cause Legionnaires' disease. The LA Fitness club at 4792 Kirkman Road had a positive test for _Legionella_, [the bacteria] that cause deadly Legionnaires' disease. It comes less than a week after another LA Fitness club near the Hunter's Creek area tested positive for _Legionella_. Investigators from the Florida Department of Health in Orange County began investigating the 2 health clubs in May 2017 after 4 individuals that use the facilities came down with Legionnaires' disease. \"There were 14 pre-remediation samples taken at the LA Fitness Metro West,\" said Kent Donahue, spokesman for the Florida Department of Health in Orange County in an email. \"Of those, one (1) bulk water sample came back positive for _Legionella_.\" The health department told both gyms to hyper-chlorinate water and put filters on shower heads. The agency is still waiting for follow-up results to see whether the recommendations fixed the _Legionella_ bacteria problem. Donahue said the 4 individuals that got Legionnaires' [disease] did not seek further treatment. _Legionella_ bacteria [are] common in lakes, streams and rivers, but can grow and become harmful inside of closed water systems, such as pipes. Larger buildings seem to have more issues, health professionals have said. LA Fitness officials did not immediately respond to a request for comment on the latest positive test but have said they followed recommendations and hired a water treatment company for both facilities. LA Fitness has been involved in 2 other Legionnaires' investigations in Orange County in the last decade, including in 2008 at a club on Michigan Street in Orlando and in 2010 at an LA Fitness center in the Waterford Lakes area. [Byline: Kyle Arnold] -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts [Two LA Fitness health clubs in Orlando (Orange County), Florida have been under investigation after 4 customers contracted legionnaires' disease. Two of the cases are tied to the club in MetroWest at 4792 Kirkman Road, and the other 2 cases are tied to the LA Fitness club at 12 700 S. Orange Blossom Trail. Both LA Fitness clubs have now tested positive for _Legionella_; but the news reports do not specify whether the species and genotypes of _Legionella_ isolated from patients and the environmental water sources matched. Matching genotypes from patient and environmental isolates will confirm transmission pathways. An LA Fitness health club in Ocoee, a city also in Orange County, Florida, which was associated with 3 cases of legionnaires' disease in April 2017 (ProMED-mail post Legionellosis - USA (03): (FL) spa & showers susp, RFI http://promedmail.org/post/20170422.4987402), was also investigated for the presence of _Legionella_, but results were reportedly negative (Legionellosis - USA (05): (FL,NYC,NV) http://promedmail.org/post/20170613.5102471). The state of Florida can be located on the HealthMap/ProMED-mail interactive map at . Orange County can be seen on the map at  . - Mod.ML A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  .] [", "EUROPEAN FOULBROOD, APIS - EUROPE (04): NORWAY (AUST-AGDER) OIE *************************************************************** A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: 4 Jul 2017 Source: OIE, WAHID [edited] European foulbrood of honey bees, Norway ---------------------------------------- Information received on [and dated] 4 Jul 2017 from Dre Kristina Landsverk, Chief Veterinary Officer, Norwegian Food Safety Authority, Ministry of Agriculture and Food, Brumunddal, Norway Summary Report type: immediate notification Date of start of the event: 27 Jun 2017 Date of confirmation of the event: 3 Jul 2017 Reason for notification: reoccurrence of a listed disease Date of previous occurrence: 25 Apr 2017 Manifestation of disease: sub-clinical infection Causal agent: _Melissococcus plutonius_ Nature of diagnosis: laboratory (advanced) This event pertains to a defined zone within the country. New outbreaks (1) Summary of outbreaks: Total outbreaks: 1 Outbreak 1: Grimstad, Vatnestrand, Agder Department, South & West Region, Aust-Agder Date of start of the outbreak: 27 Jun 2017 Outbreak status: continuing (or date resolved not provided) Epidemiological unit: apiary Affected animals: Species / Susceptible / Cases / Deaths / Killed and disposed of / Slaughtered Bees (hives) / 17 / 1 / - / - / - Affected population: One of the \"hives\" was a swarm of bees in the apiary. Outbreak statistics [rates apparent, expressed as percentages] Species / Morbidity rate / Mortality rate / Case fatality rate / Proportion susceptible animals lost* Bees (hives) / 5.88 / ** / ** / ** * Removed from the susceptible population through death, destruction, and/or slaughter ** Not calculated because of missing information Epidemiology Source of the outbreak(s) or origin of infection: unknown or inconclusive Epidemiological comments: Samples from environment in apiary. Same disease at the same place as in 2011. Control measures Measures applied: surveillance within containment and/or protection zone, quarantine; vaccination permitted (if a vaccine exists); no treatment of affected animals Measures to be applied: stamping out, disinfection Diagnostic test results Laboratory name and type / Species / Test / Test date / Result Norwegian University of Life Sciences (NMBU) (national laboratory) / Bees / bacteriological examination / 3 Jul 2017 / Positive Future reporting The event is continuing. Weekly follow-up reports will be submitted. [The location of the outbreak can be seen on the interactive map included in the OIE report at the source URL above.] -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail [In September 2016, Norway also reported an outbreak in Evje & Hornnes in Agder Department. See event summary and map at  . - Mod.CRD A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  .] [", "JAPANESE ENCEPHALITIS AND OTHER - INDIA (07): (JHARKHAND) SUSPECTED ******************************************************************** A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Mon 3 Jul 2017 Source: The Avenue Mail [edited] Fresh suspected cases of Japanese encephalitis (JE) have surfaced in the city of Jamshedpur [Jharkhand Indian state]. District officer for Integrated Disease Surveillance Programme (IDSP), Sahir Pall said they got 2 blood samples of suspected Japanese encephalitis (JE) cases, which were sent to the microbiology department of MGM Medical College in Dimna. \"We got the samples from a local hospital which has been sent to the lab for a test. The report is expected in the next 72-hours,\" he said. JE [virus] is spread through mosquito bites. Symptoms usually take 5-15 days to develop and include fever, headache, vomiting, confusion, and difficulty in moving. JE is a serious disease that may cause death. -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts [Little clinical data relating to these 2 cases is provided, nor is any information given about the circumstances under which they became infected. Although avoidance of mosquito bites as recommended in the full report above is prudent, vaccination is the best protective measure. The virus is endemic in north western India with birds as reservoir hosts and pigs as amplifiers. The _Culex_ mosquito vectors can become very abundant seasonally, breeding in wetlands. Vector control is difficult. - Mod.TY Maps of India can be accessed at . A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  .] [", "HEPATITIS A - EU (03): MSM, ECDC REPORT *************************************** A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Mon 3 July 2017 Source: AIDS Map [edited] New cases of hepatitis A cases have soared in Western Europe over the past 6 months as a result of an epidemic in gay and bisexual men, the European Centre for Disease Control reported last week [week of 25 Jun-1 Jul 2017]. ECDC says that almost 1500 cases of hepatitis A have been identified as linked, in 3 outbreaks, predominantly in men who have sex with men. A further 2660 cases are still being investigated and 10 countries have reported an increase in cases compared with 2016. Public authorities in France, Portugal and the United Kingdom have already issued warnings about the hepatitis A outbreak to gay men, recommending that gay men get vaccinated. Almost 800 of these cases have been reported in France, concentrated in the Ile-de-France (221), Hauts-de-France (157), Auvergne-Rh\u00f4ne-Alpes (79) and Provence-Alpes-C\u00f4te d'Azur regions. Numerous cases have also been reported in Spain, the United Kingdom, Portugal, Italy and Germany. The Spanish outbreak may be the largest; over 1800 cases have been reported in gay and bisexual men or in men aged 18-45 who haven't been exposed to contaminated food or water. ECDC warned earlier this month [July 2017] that gay men planning to attend the WorldPride festival in Madrid should get vaccinated against hepatitis A. Genetic sequencing shows that 3 separate strains of hepatitis A are being transmitted among gay and bisexual men in Europe. One outbreak so far comprising 509 cases was 1st identified in 2 men who reported visiting the same sex club in Amsterdam during the 2016 EuroPride festival. The outbreaks have probably not reached a peak yet, ECDC says. Delays in reporting of cases and sequencing of virus mean that surveillance figures lag 2 to 3 months behind actual diagnoses, especially in Spain and Portugal. Hepatitis A virus is shed in feces and can be transmitted through food or drink contaminated with feces. Hepatitis A can also be acquired through sexual contact, especially oral-anal sex (rimming). Fingers, hands or penises that come into contact with the anus and then the mouth could also provide a route of transmission. HAV vaccine shortages have been reported in some European countries, including Spain, Portugal, France, Italy, Austria, Denmark and Sweden. Vaccine manufacturers say that global supplies are stretched due to production problems and that shortages could persist to the end of 2018. In the meantime, ECDC says that where hepatitis A vaccination is not offered to all gay and bisexual men, the following groups ought to be prioritized:  - Men living in areas where there are ongoing outbreaks.  - Men travelling to countries where an outbreak has been reported.  - Men attending Pride festivals.  - Men at high risk of severe outcomes if they are infected with hepatitis A (confected with hepatitis B and /or C, people who inject drugs). [Byline: Keith Alcorn] -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts [Because of specific sexual practices, men who have sex with men (MSM) are known to have a higher risk of acquiring hepatitis A and, if not vaccinated in childhood, should be immunized if found to be anti-HAV negative. In an Italian study (Bordi L, Rozera G, Scognamiglio P, et al. Monophyletic outbreak of hepatitis A involving HIV-infected men who have sex with men, Rome, Italy 2008-2009. J Clin Virol. 2012; 54(1): 26-9, abstract available at  ), a large and long-lasting (18 months or longer) monophyletic outbreak of hepatitis A is reported in the Rome metropolitan area (at least since July 2008), involving a high proportion of HIV-infected MSM. All the infections detected in MSM were attributable to a monophyletic strain of HAV, circulating also in other parts of Europe around the same period. Outbreaks like this can take place despite circulation of heterologous HAV strains in the general population. The recommendations for HAV vaccination in susceptible adults from the United States' Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices [ACIP] are to vaccinate any person seeking protection from hepatitis A virus (HAV) infection and people with any of the following indications:  - men who have sex with men;  - people who use injected or non-injected illicit drugs;  - people working with HAV-infected primates or with HAV in a research laboratory setting;  - people with chronic liver disease and people who receive clotting factor concentrates;  - people traveling to or working in countries that have high or intermediate endemicity of hepatitis A; and  - unvaccinated people who anticipate close personal contact (such as household or regular babysitting) with an international adoptee during the 1st 60 days after arrival in the United States from a country with high or intermediate endemicity of hepatitis A. The 1st dose of the 2-dose hepatitis A vaccine series should be administered as soon as adoption is planned, ideally 2 or more weeks before the arrival of the adoptee. The HAV vaccination history of the cases is not stated. - Mod.LL A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  .] [", "MONKEYPOX - AFRICA: CONGO DR, CENTRAL AFRICAN REPUBLIC ****************************************************** A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Fri 30 Jun 2017 17:00 Source: WHO Africa Weekly Bulletin of Outbreaks and Other Emergencies [edited] [1] Democratic Republic of the Congo: As of 14 May 2017, since 27 Jan 2017, (susp.) 78 cases, (conf.) 7 cases; Cases reported in the department of Likouala and the department of Cuvette (unconfirmed). Suspected cases have been reported from B\u00e9tou, Enyelle, Dongou, Impfondo and Owando districts; 4 deaths. [2] Central African Republic: As of 02 Jun 2017, (susp.) 3 cases, (conf.) 1 case; During week 22, one new suspected case was reported from Mba\u00efki near the border of the Republic of Congo. A previously reported suspect case (onset during week 20) was PCR negative. Ten case contacts are currently under observation. -- Communicated by: Olutayo Olajide Babalobi Lecturer and Consultant Epizootiologist (One Health, Participatory Epizootiology and Veterinary ICT Research Group) Department of Veterinary Public Health and Preventive Medicine Faculty of Veterinary Medicine University of Ibadan Ibadan, Nigeria [Sporadic cases of monkeypox with occasional deaths in these countries is not surprising. As noted in previous ProMED-mail posts, the monkeypox virus clade in the Congo Basin causes more severe disease in humans, with a case fatality rate of 11-17 percent, than the clade in Ghana, which causes few fatalities. The virus is seldom transmitted directly from one person to another, but there is a documented instance of that in the Republic of the Congo. Monkeys are not the reservoirs of the virus, despite the name that the virus has received. Although not determined, the main reservoirs of monkeypox are suspected to be rodents, including rope squirrels (_Funisciurus_ sp; an arboreal rodent) and terrestrial rodents in the genera _Cricetomys_ and _Graphiurus_. ProMED thanks Olutayo Olajide Babalobi for submitting this report. A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map of Republic of Congo can be accessed at: and Central African Republic at:  - Mod.TY] [", "E. COLI EHEC - USA (14): (UTAH) O157, FATALITIES ************************************************ A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Tue 4 Jul 2017 10:38 AM Source: CBS News [edited] Utah health authorities were investigating what triggered an _E. coli_ outbreak in a mostly-polygamous community on the Utah-Arizona border after the bacteria killed 2 children and sickened 4 others. Early indications suggest the E. coli may be linked to contaminated food or exposure to animals - not the town of Hildale's water supply, said David Heaton, spokesman for the Southwest Utah Public Health Department. He said it appears isolated to one neighborhood. Officials believe the illness may have come from animal exposure or food poisoning, but the health department is also looking at the water supply, Heaton told CBS Salt Lake City station KUTV. Their biggest concern is to make sure the _E. coli_ doesn't spread, he said. Heaton said he can't release the names or ages of the deceased children, or say if they are related, due to privacy concerns. He said they died in the past 2 weeks after getting hemolytic uremic syndrome, also known as HUS, which causes kidney damage. E. coli is a bacterium that can cause diarrheal illness, said Dr David Blodgett, a Southwest Utah Public Health Department health officer. \"Some of the cases in this outbreak have been identified as the O157:H7 strain, characterized by bloody diarrhea and serious complications. Our thoughts and sympathies are with the families who have been affected,\" Blodgett said. About 5 to 10 percent of people diagnosed with _E. coli_ O157 infection develop a potentially life-threatening complication that can lead to kidney failure, according to the CDC. Utah Department of Health spokeswoman Jenny Johnson said deaths from _E. coli_ are pretty rare with an average of only one person a year dying from the illness in Utah, a state of about 3 million people. There are 80 to 100 cases per year in Utah of a strain of _E. coli_ that have a toxin called Shiga that makes people sick, Johnson said. The sister towns of Hildale, Utah and Colorado City, Arizona, are home to a polygamous group known as the Fundamentalist Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-Day Saints. It is a radical offshoot of mainstream Mormonism, which disavowed polygamy more than 100 years ago. Disease-causing strains of _E. coli_ are typically found in human and animal waste. -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail [Now a total of 6 cases are reported. Since less than 10 percent of EHEC statistically develop hemolytic uremic syndrome, it is likely that more cases have occurred. Most of the deaths associated with HUS are associated with central nervous system complications such as seizures, mental status changes and stroke. - Mod.LL A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  .] [", "HEPATITIS C - USA (08): (VIRGINIA) UNLICENSED TATTOOING, REQUEST FOR INFORMATION ******************************************************************************** A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Sun 2 Jul 2017 11:04 am Source: Associated Press [edited] A rise in hepatitis C cases has led to the arrests of tattoo artists in southwest Virginia. The Roanoke Times reported [Sun 2 Jul 2017] that more people could be charged as the investigation continues. Police in Pulaski, Virginia, arrested 4 men in June 2017 for unlicensed tattooing, a misdemeanor offense. Hepatitis is a viral infection that can damage people's livers, sometimes fatally. Police Chief Gary Roche and attorneys working on the cases said they could not recall similar charges in the region's courts. Pulaski police issued a warning in May 2017 that hepatitis C had been spread by unclean and unlicensed tattooing. It is illegal in Virginia to charge money for tattoos without a license and health departments are required to inspect tattoo parlors. -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts [It would be interesting to know if data was available in these Virginia cases or elsewhere to demonstrate genetic identity of HCV between recipients of tattoo recipients in a look back program or with a tattooist who is infected. Certainly tattooing is a risk factor for the acquisition of hepatitis C, even in persons with a history of injection drug use, as demonstrated in the publication below. Most studies do not have data on the licensure status of the tattooist. Carney K, Dhalla S, Aytaman A, Tenner CT, Francois F: Association of tattooing and hepatitis C virus infection: a multicenter case-control study. Hepatology. 2013;57: 2117-2123. Abstract -------- \"Although injection drug use (IDU) and blood transfusions prior to 1992 are well-accepted risk factors for hepatitis C virus (HCV) infection, many studies that evaluated tattooing as a risk factor for HCV infection did not control for a history of IDU or transfusion prior to 1992. In this large, multicenter, case-control study, we analyzed demographic and HCV risk factor exposure history data from 3871 patients, including 1930 with chronic HCV infection (HCV RNA-positive) and 1941 HCV-negative (HCV antibody-negative) controls. Crude and fully adjusted odds ratios (ORs) of tattoo exposure by multivariate logistic regression in HCV-infected versus controls were determined. As expected, IDU (65.9 percent versus 17.8 percent; P .] [", "SALMONELLOSIS, SEROTYPE ENTERITIDIS - EU/EEA: POLISH EGGS ********************************************************* A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Fri 30 Jun 2017 Source: Poultry Med ]edited] Since the ECDC and EFSA joint rapid outbreak assessment was published on 7 March 2017, 6 EU Member States (Belgium, France, Italy, Norway, Sweden and the UK) have reported 50 confirmed and 12 probable new cases associated with the multi-country outbreak of _Salmonella [enterica_ serotype] Enteritidis phage type 8 infections (MLVA profiles 2-9-7-3-2 and 2-9-6-3-2) ongoing in the EU/EEA. In addition, 12 probable cases have been reclassified as confirmed. The UK has reported 47 of the 63 outbreak cases since March [2017]. From 1 May 2016 to 26 Jun 2017, 14 EU countries had 280 confirmed and 257 probable cases. The outbreak peaked in the last week of September 2016 when around 60 cases were reported. From 2012 to 31 March 2016, 107 historical confirmed and 24 probable cases were also reported. Croatia recorded the death of a 5 year old child and Hungary also noted a fatal case. Up to 14 countries have been affected: Croatia, Denmark, Finland, France, Greece, Italy, Luxembourg, Slovenia, Belgium, Hungary, the Netherlands, Norway, Sweden and the UK. The outbreak investigation identified eggs from 3 Polish packing centers as the vehicle of infection. Following control measures in Poland in November 2016, new outbreak cases decreased. Fermy Drobiu Wo\u017aniak (Wozniak Poultry Farms) was named as the supplier of contaminated eggs by several national authorities. Since March 2017, the number of newly reported cases has increased: Up to 63 outbreak cases, 53 confirmed and 10 probable. The isolates from the confirmed cases belonged to both whole genome sequencing clusters associated with the outbreak. Confirmed cases with a travel history to Portugal have only been seen since mid-April 2017. ECDC said it was plausible that Portugal, which had not reported outbreak cases so far, has only recently been affected by the outbreak. -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts [Salmonellosis is often thought to be associated with cracked eggs or eggs dirty with fecal matter, a problem controlled by cleaning procedures implemented in the egg industry. It is clearly the case, however, that most of the salmonellosis outbreaks linked to eggs were associated with uncracked, disinfected grade A eggs, or foods containing such eggs. The undamaged eggs become contaminated during ovulation, and thus were contaminated with the bacteria before the egg shell was formed. To avoid this, uncooked eggs should only be used as an ingredient, if pasteurized. - Mod.LL A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  .] [", "HEPATITIS B - AUSTRALIA: (NEW SOUTH WALES) ****************************************** A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Tue 4 Jul 2017 12:52am Source: Fairfield Advance [edited] The 2016 South Western Sydney Local Health District community profile estimates 17 000 people in southwestern Sydney live with hepatitis B and C. There are 98 hepatitis B notifications per 100 000 residents in Fairfield, compared with on average 31 per 100 000 across NSW. If left unmanaged and untreated, chronic hepatitis B (and C) can cause progressive liver disease, cirrhosis and liver cancer. \"Although there is no evidence indicating an epidemic in the Fairfield area, anyone who thinks they may have hepatitis B (or C) is encouraged to see their GP and get a blood test,\" a SWSLHD spokeswoman said. Hepatitis can be transmitted through the sharing of injecting equipment, tattooing and piercings. About 75 percent of southwest Sydney residents living with chronic hepatitis B were born in countries with high hepatitis B prevalence. Those countries include Vietnam, China, Cambodia, the Philippines and Fiji. Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people also have a higher prevalence. \"The district provides training and support to GPs on both hepatitis B (and C) including additional training for Vietnamese and Arabic speaking GPs to support testing and treatment in language,\" the spokeswoman said. \"Hepatitis B and C Health Pathways have also been developed in collaboration with the South Western Sydney Primary Health Network to support GPs.\" \"Hepatitis B is both a blood borne and sexually transmissible infection,\" the spokeswoman said. \"The main routes of transmission include from mother-to-child at or around birth, during unprotected sex, and through sharing of injecting equipment.\" The spokeswoman said vaccination, practicing safe sex, taking care with tattoos and piercings and not sharing needles and injecting equipment were preventive measures against hepatitis. Hepatitis prevention  - Get vaccinated against hepatitis B  - Practice safe sex  - Never share needles, syringes and other injecting equipment and don't share toothbrushes, razors or other personal care items  - Take care with tattoos and piercings -- use a professional business with strict sterilization practices [Byline: Eliza Barr] -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts [The individuals with chronic hepatitis B probably acquired it in their home countries from neonatal transmission but do represent a reservoir for transmission to susceptible people. The difference between Fairfield and NSW for hepatitis prevalence likely is related to differences in the population demographics. Fairfield is a western suburb of Sydney, in the state of New South Wales, Australia. Fairfield is located 29 kilometers [18.01 miles] west of the Sydney central business district. - Mod.LL A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  .] [", "E. COLI EHEC - UK (02): (SCOTLAND) O157, RACE PARTICIPANTS, ALERT ***************************************************************** A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Tue 4 Jul 2017 Source: The Herald [edited] Participants in an endurance event at a Scottish castle have been warned to look out for symptoms of _E. coli_ O157 after it was identified among those who took part. NHS Dumfries and Galloway said \"a small number of cases\" of the bacteria have been found in those involved in the Tough Mudder event at Drumlanrig Castle in June 2017. It has advised anyone associated with the event who experiences symptoms to seek medical advice. A spokesman for the health board said: \"NHS Dumfries and Galloway can confirm that we are aware of a small number of cases of _E. coli_ O157 across Scotland that appear to be associated with participation in the Tough Mudder event which was held at Drumlanrig Castle on [17 and 18 Jun 2017]. \"Any activity undertaken on agricultural land inevitably involves a small risk of gastrointestinal infection.\" Symptoms include diarrhea, vomiting, stomach cramps or fever. The health board said people usually notice symptoms 3 to 4 days after they have been infected, but they can take anything up to 14 days to develop. The endurance course is described by organizers as \"probably the toughest event on the planet\" and involves 20 obstacles over a 10-12 mile course. About 11 500 people took part in 2017. A spokesman for the event said: \"The safety of Tough Mudder participants, spectators, volunteers and staff is our number one priority. Tough Mudder is aware of the situation in Scotland and is working closely with local authorities. We are sorry to hear that Tough Mudder participants are unwell and wish them a full and speedy recovery.\" -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts [ProMED-mail has previously reported on a 2012 outbreak of campylobacteriosis related to a similar event in Nevada (Campylobacteriosis - USA (02): (NV) race participants, 2012 Archive Number: http://promedmail.org/post/20140501.2443247). With exposure to a lot of the environment and mud in an agricultural setting, it is not surprising that zoonotic enteric pathogens such as enterohemorrhagic _E. coli_ in this case but also campylobacteriosis and salmonellosis might occur. Since EHEC can have an incubation period which is longer than most bacterial enteric pathogens, participants who may have come from long distances may then present there. Tough Mudder ( ) is an endurance event series in which participant's attempt 10-12 mile-long (16-19 km) obstacle courses that test mental as well as physical strength. The obstacles often play on common human fears, such as fire, water, electricity and heights. The main principle of the Tough Mudder revolves around teamwork. The Tough Mudder organization values camaraderie throughout the course, designing obstacles that encourage group participation. Participants must commit to helping others complete the course, putting teammates before themselves, and overcoming fears. - Mod.LL A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  .] [", "---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- Due to technical difficulties we apologize for the delay of this email. ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------  HAND, FOOT & MOUTH DISEASE UPDATE (06) - THAILAND  *************************************************  A ProMED-mail post  http://www.promedmail.org  ProMED-mail is a program of the  International Society for Infectious Diseases  http://www.isid.org  Date: Tue 27 Jun 2017 5:30 AM  Source: Thai visa [edited]  http://news.thaivisa.com/article/5261/over-24000-of-mostly-children-afflicted-with-hand-foot-mouth-disease-in-six-months Over 24 000 people, mostly children up to 4-years-old, were infected with hand-foot-mouth disease during the 1st 6 months of this year [2017] with one fatality, according to the statistics of the Diseases Control Department.  Between 40 000 -- 76 000 people are infected with hand-foot-mouth disease each year during the past 5 years and 2 -- 3 people die from the disease annually. A total of 86.49 percent of the cases are reported in Bangkok followed by provinces in upper central region and upper southern region.  However, Dr Jetsads Chokedamrongsook, director-general of Diseases Control Department, noted that the incidence of hand-foot-mouth disease was abnormally high in the past week [week of 18-24 Jun 2017] compared to the same period during the past 5 years.  --  Communicated by:  ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts  [While the subtype of Coxsackie A virus is not stated in the report, Coxsackievirus A16 (CV-A16; Picornaviridae) is the enterovirus type most frequently associated with hand-foot-and-mouth disease (HFMD) in children. It is a common infection in children 1 - 5-years-old during the hot and humid season across East and South-East Asia. Severe disease and complications are mainly associated with EV71 as compared with CV-A16. Transmission of HFMD is increased in crowded and closed environments, including kindergartens and child daycare centers, where infectious droplets can easily spread via sharing of objects or surfaces (fomites).  A time-resolved phylogenetic analysis conducted in Europe (France) together with HFMD surveillance data indicated that CV-A16 persistence is sustained by continuing virus migration at different geographic scales, from community transmission [as likely is the case in Thailand] to virus transportation between distant countries (J Virol. 2017 Jun 28. pii: JVI.00630-17. doi: 10.1128/JVI.00630-17).  Thailand health officials had issued an advisory [in February 2017] after reporting increased numbers of hand-foot-and-mouth disease (HFMD), mostly in children under the age of 5.  See ProMED-mail Hand, foot, & mouth disease update (05): Thailand (SK) 20170623.5125187 and Hand, foot & mouth disease update (02): Thailand, Viet Nam 20170303.4875744 for a discussion of HFMD in Thailand.  Maps of Thailand may be found at http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Provinces_of_Thailand and http://healthmap.org/promed/p/151. - Mod.LK  A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: http://healthmap.org/promed/p/151.]", "---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ProMED apologizes for technical difficulties that resulted in a delay in sending this email. ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- CHOLERA, DIARRHEA AND DYSENTERY UPDATE (65): ASIA (YEMEN) ********************************************************* A ProMED-mail post http://www.promedmail.org ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases http://www.isid.org Date: Sat 1 Jul 2017 22:39:33 Source: XinHuaNet [edited] http://news.xinhuanet.com/english/2017-07/01/c_136410041.htm The WHO said here on [Sat 1 Jul 2017] that a cholera outbreak in war-torn Yemen has killed 1500 people since late April 2017. The suspected cases have reached 246 000 as the epidemic has hit 21 out of the 23 provinces in the country, Dr Nevio Zagaria, the chief of WHO, said in a press conference. Meanwhile, Sherin Varkey, acting representative of the United nations Childrens Fund (UNICEF), said during the joint press conference that one in 4 of the dead are children. The death toll has increased by 100 and suspected cases by nearly 28 000 in just 4 days after a Wednesday's report by WHO, where it put the death toll at 1400 and suspected cases at 218 798. Since 27 April 2017, the cholera cases in Yemen have been \"increasing at an average of 5000 a day,\" said WHO. \"We are now facing the worst cholera outbreak in the world.\" More than 3 years into war, Yemen is facing a total collapse, where 2 3rds of the total population, around 19 million, need humanitarian aid. About 10.3 million people are at risk of famine and 14.5 million lack access to safe drinking water. Fewer than 45 percent of the country's hospitals are operational, but even the operational ones are coping with huge challenges, especially the lack of medications, medical equipment and staff. The blockade on Yemen, as part of a Saudi-led bombing campaign launched in March 2015, has deepened the crisis in the country which used to import most of its basic needs. The war has pit the Iranian-allied Shiite Houthi rebel movement against a Sunni Saudi-led military coalition, after Houthis toppled Saudi-backed President Abd-Rabbu Mansour Hadi and his government in late 2014. -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail [The statistics of the dreadfully impressive ongoing epidemic in Yemen in 2017 are: Date (2017) / Cases / Deaths 8 May / 1360 / 25 11 May / 2752 / 51 13 May / 8595 / 115 14 May / 11 000 / 180 17 May / 17 200 / 209 19 May / 23 500 / 242 21 May / 29 300 / 315 22 May / 35 217 / 361 24 May / 42 207 / 420 27 May / 51 832 / 471 30 May / 65 300 / 532 02 Jun / 73 700 / 605 04 Jun / 86 400 / 676 05 Jun / 91 400 / 728 06 Jun / 96 000 / 746 07 Jun / 101 820 / 789 10 Jun / 116 700 / 869 12 Jun / 124 002 / 923 14 Jun / 140 116 / 989 16 Jun / 151 000 / 1054 19 Jun / 166 976 / 1146 21 Jun / 179 548 / 1205 23 Jun / 200 000 / 1310 26 Jun / 219 000 / 1400 28 Jun / 231 364 / 1439 30 Jun / 240 000 / 1500 To be consistent with past posts, the date is the day prior to the specific posting but, as this one, may not reflect the data point day. There is with no clear sign of the numbers slowing down. - Mod.LL A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: http://healthmap.org/promed/p/126.]", "---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ProMED apologizes for technical difficulties that resulted in a delay in sending this email. ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- MERS-COV (44): LEBANON ex SAUDI ARABIA, SAUDI ARABIA, EXPERIMENTAL ANTIVIRAL, REQUEST FOR INFORMATION ***************************************************************************************************** A ProMED-mail post http://www.promedmail.org ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases http://www.isid.org In this update: [1] Lebanon ex Saudi Arabia - ECDC CDTR, RFI [2] Lebanon ex Saudi Arabia - Lebanon MOH 19 Jun 2017 [accessed 1 Jul 2017] [In Arabic, mach.trans, edited], RFI [3] Saudi Arabia 1 new case - Saudi MOH 29 Jun - 1 Jul 2017 [4] New antiviral agent ****** [1] Lebanon ex Saudi Arabia - ECDC CDTR, RFI Date: Sat 1 Jul 2017 Source: ECDC Communicable Disease Threats Report 1 Jul 2017 [edited] https://ecdc.europa.eu/sites/portal/files/documents/Communicable-disease-threats-report-01-jul-2017.pdf Middle East respiratory syndrome coronavirus (MERS-CoV) - Multistate Opening date: [24 Sep 2012] Latest update: [30 Jun 2017] Epidemiological summary Since the last update of MERS-CoV on [9 Jun 2017], 41 additional cases of MERS-CoV have been reported, 40 from Saudi Arabia and one reported by Lebanon in a Lebanese citizen returning from Saudi Arabia. Saudi Arabia: among the 40 recently reported cases on [19 Jun 2017], 13 are associated to 2 previously identify clusters. The 1st cluster is related to nosocomial transmission in a hospital of Riyadh where 32 cases have been laboratory confirmed. All the cases were asymptomatic. The 2nd cluster is also related to nosocomial transmission in another hospital in Riyadh where one suspect case and 8 laboratory confirmed cases have been identified. A 3rd cluster was reported in a 3rd hospital in Riyadh on [13 June 2017]. This cluster includes 6 cases, including one asymptomatic case who visited the emergency room of the hospital of the 1st cluster. The other 5 cases are secondary household and health care worker contacts. Lebanon: on [28 June 2017], Lebanon reported one imported case from Saudi Arabia. The case developed symptoms before traveling back from Saudi Arabia to Lebanon. The patient is isolated at home and authorities started contact tracing. One case of MERS has previously been reported in Lebanon on 9 May 2014. According to WHO, since April 2012 and as of [30 June 2017], 2030 cases of MERS, including 704 deaths, have been reported by health authorities worldwide. ECDC assessment The extent to which healthcare facilities in Riyadh are affected is unknown, as is the number of asymptomatic individuals who may be infected with MERS-CoV. The role of hospitals as amplifiers of MERS-CoV infection is now well known, making the strict and timely application of infection prevention and control measures imperative. Sporadic, imported cases can be expected in EU/EEA Member States, and are associated with a risk of nosocomial spread. This highlights the need for awareness among healthcare workers, early detection through functioning testing algorithms, preparedness planning and application of strict infection prevention and control measures. The risk of sustained human-to-human transmission in Europe remains very low. ECDC's conclusion continues to be that the MERS-CoV outbreak poses a low risk to the EU, as stated in a rapid risk assessment published on 21 October 2015, which provides details on the last case reported in Europe. -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail Rapporteur Mary Marshall [The HealthMap/ProMED map of Lebanon can be found at: http://healthmap.org/promed/p/85. - Mod.MPP] ****** [2] Lebanon ex Saudi Arabia - Lebanon MOH 16 Jun 2017 [accessed 1 Jul 2017] [In Arabic, mach.trans, edited] RFI Date: Mon 19 Jun 2017 Source: Lebanon MOH 19 Jun 2017 [accessed 1 Jul 2017] [in Arabic, mach.trans, edited] http://www.moph.gov.lb/en/Media/view/12880/1/press-release-on-19-06-2017-concerning-the-diagnosis-of-infection-with-the-mers-coronavirus Press Release on [19 Jun 2017] Concerning the diagnosis of a MERS-Coronavirus infection The Ministry of Public Health report on the diagnosis of a human infection with the MERS-CoV on 16 Jun 2017 The patient returned to Lebanon from Saudi Arabia complaining of several days of high fever, without acute respiratory symptoms. He received the necessary treatment and is currently in good health at his home where he is subjected to domestic isolation and control by the Ministry of Public Health. The Ministry is also monitoring all identified contacts of the patient and those who were near him during his travel to and residence in Lebanon. Note that this is the 2nd case of MERS-CoV infection diagnosed in Lebanon, the 1st case having been recorded in 2014. That case was also treated with preventive measures and did not result in transmission of the virus to other individuals in Lebanon. -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail Rapporteur Mary Marshall [As mentioned above, this is the 2nd laboratory confirmed case of MERS-CoV infection reported by Lebanon. Interestingly, the 1st reported case (9 Jun 2014) was an individual who had returned to Lebanon after traveling in the Gulf region, including to Saudi Arabia. (see MERS-CoV - Eastern Mediterranean (54): Saudi Arabia, Lebanon 20140509.2461876 and MERS-CoV - Eastern Mediterranean (53): Saudi Arabia, Lebanon, RFI 20140509.2459095). Neither one of the above reports on this case provide demographic nor epidemiologic information other than the case occurred in a Lebanese citizen who traveled to Saudi Arabia. More information detailing the age, gender, location of travel in Saudi Arabia, possible high risk exposures while there (contact with camels, camel products, contact with the health facilities, contact with any known MERS-CoV infected individual) and purpose of trip to Saudi Arabia (was the individual participating in Umrah, attending business meetings, a tourist). ProMED-mail would greatly appreciate receiving more information from knowledgeable sources. - Mod.MPP] ****** [3] Saudi Arabia 1 new case - Saudi MOH 29 Jun - 1 Jul 2017 Date: Sat 1 Jul 2017 Source: Saudi MOH 29 Jun - 1 Jul 2017 [edited] http://www.moh.gov.sa/en/CCC/PressReleases/Pages/default.aspx?PageIndex=1 As of today [Sat 1 Jul 2017], there have been a total of: 1672 laboratory-confirmed cases of MERS-CoV infection, including 678 deaths [reported case fatality rate 40.6 percent], 974 recoveries, and 20 currently active cases/infections. [As previously mentioned, the numbers of deaths, recoveries and currently active cases come from my spreadsheet tallies differ from those listed on the Saudi MOH website; my spreadsheet counts asymptomatic infections.] Since the last ProMED-mail update [28 Jun 2017], there have been a total of: 1 newly confirmed case/infection 1 newly reported fatality, and 4 newly reported recoveries. Information on newly confirmed case/infection with MERS-CoV Date: Sat 1 Jul 2017 http://www.moh.gov.sa/en/CCC/PressReleases/Pages/statistics-2017-07-01-001.aspx - A 70-year-old Saudi male, non-healthcare worker, from Al Baha [Al B\u0101hah Region] currently in stable condition. Classification still under review. Information on newly reported fatality: Date: Fri 30 Jun 2017 http://www.moh.gov.sa/en/CCC/PressReleases/Pages/statistics-2017-06-30-001.aspx - A 70-year-old Saudi male, non-healthcare worker from Riyadh [Riyadh region] with a history of pre-existing co-morbidities. [reported as a newly confirmed case on 23 Jun 2017 at which time he was noted to be in critical condition. At the time of initial confirmation report, classification was still pending. Information on newly reported recoveries (4 recoveries) - All 4 were from Riyadh Date: Fri 30 Jun 2017 http://www.moh.gov.sa/en/CCC/PressReleases/Pages/statistics-2017-06-30-001.aspx 1 - A 47-year-old Saudi male, non-healthcare worker, with a history of pre-existing co-morbidities, [Most likely the same individual reported by the MOH as a 40-year-old on 14 Jun 2017, at which time he was noted to be in stable condition. Classified as a primary case with high risk exposure history still under investigation. - Mod.MPP] 2 - A 57-year-old expat male, healthcare worker, with history of pre-existing co-morbidities. [reported as a newly confirmed case on 11 Jun 2017 at which time he was noted to be in stable condition. Classified as a secondary healthcare acquired case in a healthcare worker. - Mod.MPP] Date: Thu 29 Jun 2017 http://www.moh.gov.sa/en/CCC/PressReleases/Pages/statistics-2017-06-29-001.aspx 3 - A 46-year-old expat male, non-healthcare worker, with a history of pre-existing co-morbidities. [reported as a newly confirmed case on 4 Jun 2017 at which time he was noted to be in stable condition, having been identified as an asymptomatic contact of a previously confirmed MERS-CoV infected individual. Classified as a secondary healthcare acquired case in a patient. - Mod.MPP] 4- A 30-year-old expat female, healthcare worker, with no history of co-morbidities. [reported as a newly confirmed case either on 2 or 8 Jun 2017 at which time she was noted to be in stable condition having been identified as an asymptomatic contact of a previously confirmed MERS-CoV infected individual. Classified as a secondary healthcare acquired case in a healthcare worker. - Mod.MPP] -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail [In the past few days since the last update [28 Jun 2017] there has only been one newly confirmed case of MERS-CoV infection reported by Saudi Arabia. The case was reported from Baha, where there had been a previously reported case on 23 Jun 2017 who died on 30 Jun 2017 (see details above on fatal case reported during this period). Of note is that today marks 14 days since the most recent reported nosocomial transmitted case in Riyadh, and hopefully signals that the nosocomial transmission has been interrupted. Maps showing the locations of the reported case, fatality and recoveries can be found at the source URLs. The HealthMap/ProMED map of Saudi Arabia can be found at: http://healthmap.org/promed/p/131. - Mod.MPP] ****** [4] New antiviral agent Date: Thu 29 Jun 2017 Source: Science Daily [edited] https://www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2017/06/170629123855.htm New antiviral drug inhibits epidemic SARS, MERS and animal coronaviruses Source: Vanderbilt University Medical Center Summary: A new antiviral drug candidate inhibits a broad range of coronaviruses, including the SARS and MERS coronaviruses, a multi-institutional team of investigators reports. The findings support further development of the drug candidate for treating and preventing current coronavirus infections and potential future epidemic outbreaks. A new antiviral drug candidate inhibits a broad range of coronaviruses, including the SARS and MERS coronaviruses, a multi-institutional team of investigators reports this week [week of 25 Jun-1 Jul 2017] in Science Translational Medicine. The findings support further development of the drug candidate for treating and preventing current coronavirus infections and potential future epidemic outbreaks. Coronaviruses are a genetically diverse family of viruses that infect birds and mammals, with most coronavirus strains limited to infecting only certain hosts. Human coronaviruses, for example, cause up to 30 percent of common colds. In the last 15 years, however, coronaviruses have demonstrated their ability to jump into new species. Zoonotic (animal) coronaviruses have infected humans, causing severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS) and Middle East respiratory syndrome (MERS), severe diseases with high mortality rates ranging from 10 percent for SARS to 40 percent for MERS. The MERS-coronavirus continues to cause new infections in the Middle East. \"There's a real concern that the MERS coronavirus could escape broadly when millions of people visit Saudi Arabia for the Hajj,\" said Mark Denison, M.D., Craig-Weaver Professor of Pediatrics and professor of Pathology, Microbiology and Immunology at Vanderbilt University School of Medicine. But to date, there has been no effective antiviral drug for any known coronavirus, Denison noted. Denison and his team at Vanderbilt have studied the basic biology of coronaviruses for more than 20 years. In an effort to find chemical tools that would allow them to probe viral replication, graduate student Brett Case screened a series of compounds selected and provided by Gilead Sciences. Case demonstrated that one of the compounds was highly active against coronaviruses in cultured cells. The finding was a surprise, Denison said, because compounds in the same class (nucleoside analogs) have normally failed to inhibit coronavirus replication. The compound, called GS-5734, is currently in clinical development for treatment of Ebola virus disease. Denison's longtime collaborator Ralph Baric, Ph.D., at the University of North Carolina and his team demonstrated that GS-5734 inhibits SARS-coronavirus and MERS-coronavirus replication in multiple in vitro systems, including cultures of primary human airway epithelial cells, which are the cells infected by respiratory coronaviruses. The researchers also showed that GS-5734 was effective against a circulating human coronavirus, bat coronaviruses, and bat coronaviruses that are considered \"prepandemic\" because they can infect cultured human cells. Using a mouse model of SARS, the investigators demonstrated that both prophylactic (before infection) and early therapeutic (soon after infection) administration of GS-5734 reduced viral load in the lungs and improved respiratory functions. \"This compound shows broad activity against a variety of human and animal coronaviruses and represents an exciting potential therapeutic for a family of viruses prone to emergence from animal reservoirs,\" Denison said. Denison and his team at Vanderbilt will continue to use the compound \"as a probe to try to understand the biology of the virus, how and why this drug works, and to identify new targets for inhibiting coronaviruses,\" he said. \"This is an exciting example of how pursuing fundamental research to understand the mechanisms of virus replication and pathogenesis can lead to an important compound with therapeutic potential.\" Journal Reference: Timothy P. Sheahan et al. Broad-spectrum antiviral GS-5734 inhibits both epidemic and zoonotic coronaviruses. Science Translational Medicine, June 2017 DOI: 10.1126/scitranslmed.aal3653 [full article available at: http://stm.sciencemag.org/content/9/396/eaal3653.full] -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail [We usually shy away from posting early studies on possible new biologics or antimicrobial agents as many new promising agents look very promising in in vitro studies and in laboratory animal models but when transferred to humans either fail in terms of safety or in terms of efficacy. That being said, for those interested in the field, I strongly recommend reading this article. In the past 15 years, we've dealt with 2 coronaviruses that have done species jump from bats through intermediary hosts into humans with significant mortality. In 2002-2003 there was the SARS-CoV and since 2012 the MERS-CoV. In both cases, no existing antiviral agents have been effective therapeutically, with the MERS-CoV having a reported case fatality rate of approximately 40 percent (reported by Saudi Arabia, and somewhat less on the global level). - Mod.MPP]", "---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ProMED apologizes for technical difficulties that resulted in a delay in sending this email. ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- BOVINE TUBERCULOSIS - USA (09): (SOUTH DAKOTA) WILDLIFE NOT *********************************************************** A ProMED-mail post http://www.promedmail.org ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases http://www.isid.org Date: Thu 29 Jun 2017 Source: Associated Press [edited] http://rapidcityjournal.com/news/local/bovine-tb-in-harding-county-cattle-didn-t-spread-to/article_aad6b057-04b2-5535-b705-11e068b52b06.html Testing shows that bovine tuberculosis in a beef cattle herd in Harding County [see 05 Mar 2017 Bovine tuberculosis - USA (02): (SD) 20170305.4880068 ] didn't spread to area wildlife. The infected cattle herd was identified in February [2017]. South Dakota Game, Fish and Parks tested white-tailed deer, mule deer, pronghorn, coyotes and raccoons to determine if the respiratory disease had spread. The agency says all 199 animals tested negative. Testing was done by the National Veterinary Services Laboratories. More testing is planned during the fall hunting season. The salvageable big game meat that was processed will be delivered to food pantries through the Feeding South Dakota program. -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail [The South Dakota Game, Fish, and Parks team is to be congratulated on their hard thorough investigation, not forgetting the laboratory team at NVSL Ames [National Veterinary Services Laboratories in Ames, Iowa]. - Mod.MHJ A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: http://healthmap.org/promed/p/243.]", "--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- Due to technical difficulties we apologize for the delay of this email. ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ZIKA VIRUS (15) - AMERICAS, RESEARCH, OBSERVATIONS ************************************************** A ProMED-mail post http://www.promedmail.org ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases http://www.isid.org In this update: [1] Cases in various countries: Americas Americas cumulative case numbers Cases in various countries not mentioned above or more recent case numbers. Mexico and Central America --- Mexico: - Jalisco state - Tamaulipas state Imported cases with little or no possibility of ongoing mosquito transmission --- USA: - Case numbers mainland - Florida economic loss - Kansas vector mosquitoes - Territories and Commonwealth [2] Situation in the Americas [3] Sexual transmission, monkeys [4] No dengue antibody ADE with Zika virus [5] Zika virus tropism [6] Case definition ****** [1] Cases in various countries WHO Tool Kit for the care and support of people affected by complications associated with Zika virus is available at http://www.who.int/mental_health/neurology/zika_toolkit/en/ Americas --- Americas cumulative case numbers As of 29 Jun 2017 http://www.paho.org/hq/index.php?option=com_content&view=article&id=12390&Itemid=42090 Country / Locally acquired: suspected / Confirmed /Imported / Deaths / Conf. Congenital Syndrome North America: Bermuda / 0 / 0 / 6 / 0 / 0 Canada / 0 / 0 / 507 / 0 / 1 USA / 0 / 225 / 5033 / 0 / 80 Latin America: Mexico / 0 / 8864 / 15 / 0 / 5 Central American Isthmus: Belize / 1294 / 206 / 0 / 0 / 0 Costa Rica / 6508 / 1833 / 32 / 0 / 6 El Salvador / 11 594 / 51 / 0 / 0 / 4 Guatemala / 3723 / 966 / 0 / 0 / 140 Honduras / 32 130 / 302 / 0 / 0 / 4 Nicaragua / 0 / 2060 / 3 / 0 / 2 Panama / 4307 / 985 / 42 / 0 / 9 Latin Caribbean: Cuba / 0 / 187/ 58 / 0 / 0 Dominican Republic / 4909 / 345 / 0 / 0 / 93 French Guiana / 10 500 / 483 / 10 / 0 / 1 Guadeloupe / 30 845 / 382 / 0 / 0 / 5 Haiti / 2955 / 5 / 0 / 0 / 1 Martinique / 36 680 / 21 / 0 / 0 / 7 Puerto Rico / 0 / 40 357 / 137 / 5 / 42 Saint Barthelemy / 990 / 61 / 0 / 0 / 0 Saint Martin / 3280 / 200 / 0 / 0 / 0 Non-Latin Caribbean: Anguilla / 31 / 23 / 1/ 0 / 0 Antigua and Barbuda / 465 / 14 / 2 / 0 / 0 Aruba / 1208 / 681 / 7 / 0 / 0 Bahamas / 440 / 25 / 3/ 0 / 0 Barbados / 705 / 150 / 0 / 0 / 1 Bonaire, St Eustatius and Saba / 235 / 437 / 0 / 0 / 0 Caymans / 232 / 31 / 10 / 0 / 0 Curacao / 2589 / 1259 / 0 / 0 / 0 Dominica / 1154 / 79 / 0 / 0 / 0 Grenada / 335 / 118 / 0 / 0 / 2 Guyana / 0 / 37 / 0 / 0 / 0 Jamaica / 7650 / 203 / 0 / 0 / 0 Montserrat / 18 / 5 / 0 / 0 / 0 Saint Kits and Nevis / 554/ 33 / 0 / 0 / 0 Saint Lucia / 822 / 50 / 0 / 0 / 0 Saint Vincent and the Grenadines / 508 / 83 / 0 / 0 / 0 Sint Maarten / 253 / 149 / 0 / 0 / 0 Suriname / 2768 / 724 / 0 / 4 / 4 Trinidad and Tobago / 0 / 718 / 1 / 0 / 3 Turks and Caicos / 200 / 25 / 3 / 0 / 0 Virgin Islands (UK) / 74 / 53 / 0 / 0 / 0 Virgin Islands (USA) / 1138 / 1019 / 2 / 0 / 0 Andean Area: Bolivia / 2288 / 712 / 4 / 0 / 14 Colombia / 98 245 / 9802 / 0 / 0 / 171 Ecuador / 3842 / 1848 / 15 / 0 / 5 Peru / 6128 / 1283 / 22 / 0 / 0 Venezuela / 59 965 / 2413 / 0 / 0 / 0 [Brazil and] Southern Cone: Brazil / 224 670 / 134 057 / 0 / 11 / 2775 Argentina / 869 / 126 / 40 / 0 / 2 Chile / 0 / 0 / 34 / 0 / 0 Paraguay / 666 / 16 / 0 / 0 / 2 Uruguay / 0 / 0 / 1 / 0 / 0 Totals, Americas / 567 767 / 213 706 / 5988 / 20 / 3379 [Maps showing the location of the affected islands and countries in the Americas mentioned above and below can be accessed at http://healthmap.org/promed/p/35574; North America at http://healthmap.org/promed/p/106; Central America http://healthmap.org/promed/p/39455; Caribbean http://www.mapsofworld.com/caribbean-islands/ and South America at http://healthmap.org/promed/p/6186. - Mod.TY] Cases in various countries not mentioned above or more recent case numbers. Mexico and Central America --- Mexico: - Jalisco state. 26 Jun 2017. (registered) 12 cases. http://wradio.com.mx/emisora/2017/06/26/guadalajara/1498513259_758799.html [in Spanish] - Tamaulipas state. 23 Jun 2017. (conf.) 17 cases; Sanitary jurisdictions most involved: Matamoros, Valle Hermoso, Tampico, Reynosa, Victoria, Padilla, San Fernando. https://www.elmanana.com/lideranreynosaytampicoendengue-3828410.html [in Spanish] Imported cases with little or no possibility of ongoing mosquito transmission --- USA: - Case numbers mainland. Zika virus disease in the United States, 1 Jan 2017 - 28 Jun 2017 http://www.cdc.gov/zika/geo/united-states.html State/ Symptomatic cases / Viremic blood donors Alabama 3 / 0 Alaska 1 / 0 Arizona 1 / 0 Arkansas 0 / 0 California 15 / 1 Colorado 3 / 0 Connecticut 0 / 0 Delaware 0 / 0 District of Columbia 0 / 0 Florida 16 / 3 Georgia 1 / 0 Hawaii 1 / 0 Idaho 0 / 0 Illinois 3/ 0 Indiana 1 / 0 Iowa 1 / 0 Kansas 2 / 0 Kentucky 1 / 0 Louisiana 1 / 0 Maine 1 / 0 Maryland 5/ 0 Massachusetts 6 / 0 Michigan 6 / 0 Minnesota 0 / 0 Mississippi 2 / 0 Missouri 1 / 0 Montana 0 / 0 Nebraska 1 / 0 Nevada 1 / 0 New Hampshire 0/ 0 New Jersey 2 / 0 New Mexico 0 / 0 New York 27 / 1 North Carolina 3 / 0 North Dakota 0 / 0 Ohio 3 / 0 Oklahoma 0 / 0 Oregon 2 / 0 Pennsylvania 4/ 1 Rhode Island 3 / 0 South Carolina 2 / 0 South Dakota 0 / 0 Tennessee 0 / 0 Texas 12 / 1 Utah 0 / 0 Vermont 3 / 0 Virginia 3 / 0 Washington 2 / 0 West Virginia 0 / 1 Wisconsin 2 / 0 Wyoming 2 / 0 Totals 143 / 8 - Florida economic loss. 27 June 2017. (reported) Some Wynwood businesses in the Zika virus transmission zone in 2016 in Miami saw revenue and profit dip by as much as 40 percent, according to a new study by Florida International University's Robert Stempel College of Public Health and Social Work. According to the study, 91 percent of businesses studied experienced loss of revenue and profits compared to the same time in 2015. The majority, 53 percent, saw losses of 21 to 30 percent. About 13 percent of businesses experienced declines as high as 31 to 40 percent. http://www.miamiherald.com/news/business/article158512584.html - Kansas vector mosquitoes. 26 Jun 2017. (conf.) _Aedes albopictus_ reported for the 1st time in 38 counties; _Ae. aegypti_ has been found in 4 counties in the upper northeastern part of the state. http://www.gctelegram.com/news/state/mosquitoes-that-can-carry-zika-spreading-in-kansas-cdc-says/article_58672f97-3bae-52f0-8c96-96dc0563e3d7.html - Territories and Commonwealth with local transmission: Symptomatic / Blood donors American Samoa 3 / 0 Puerto Rico 473 / 3 US Virgin Islands 37/ 0 Total 513 / 3 [A map of the USA showing the states and territories mentioned above can be accessed at http://www.mapsofworld.com/usa/] -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail ****** [2] Situation in the Americas Date: Mon 1 May 2017 Source: Amer J Trop Med Hyg DOI: https://doi.org/10.4269/ajtmh.17-0207 [edited] http://www.ajtmh.org/content/journals/10.4269/ajtmh.17-0207 Carissa Etienne, Thais dos Santos and Marcos A. Espinal. Zika Virus Disease in the Americas: A Storm in the Making. Abstract More than 700 000 cases of Zika virus (ZIKAV) disease have been officially reported to the Pan American Health Organization (PAHO) from 48 countries and territories of the Americas. The response led by the PAHO and partners suggests major lessons of this outbreak. A seemingly innocuous pathogen became the new villain, causing fear, economic losses and, most importantly, debilitating birth defects and neurological problems, reaffirming the well-known war principle of never to underestimate one's opponent. The ZIKAV tested public health capacities under the International Health Regulations, highlighting the need for continued investment in health security. Last but not least, the lack of appropriate tools was another reminder of the pressing need for innovative solutions to persistent problems. Latin America and the Caribbean have approximately 500 million persons living in areas at risk for transmission of ZIKAV. The fight against ZIKAV is not a 100-m race, but rather a marathon in which science and public health need to work hand in hand for the benefit of our peoples. -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail [In the Americas, the expansion of dengue fever over the past 4 decades, then the recent documented appearance of chikungunya virus and now Zika virus have rung the alarm bells for several decades up to the present time. For whom and for what will the alarm bells ring next time? One hopes that in the aftermath of the Zika virus outbreak, an effective system of surveillance, timely epidemiological field work, all supported by laboratories, will remain in place. Institution memory and political commitment tends to fade in the absence of a crisis. Perhaps this time things will be different and sustainable. - Mod.TY] ****** [3] Sexual transmission, monkeys Date: August 2017 [ahead of print] Source: Emerg Infect Dis. 23 (8) https://doi.org/10.3201/eid2308170036 DOI: 10.3201/eid2308.170036 [edited] https://wwwnc.cdc.gov/eid/article/23/8/17-0036_article#suggestedcitation Haddow AD, Nalca A, Rossi FD, Miller LJ, Wiley MR, Perez-Sautu U, et al. High infection rates for adult macaques after intravaginal or intrarectal inoculation with Zika virus. Abstract Unprotected sexual intercourse between persons residing in or traveling from regions with Zika virus transmission is a risk factor for infection. To model risk for infection after sexual intercourse, we inoculated rhesus and cynomolgus macaques with Zika virus by intravaginal or intrarectal routes. In macaques inoculated intravaginally, we detected viremia and virus RNA in 50 percent of macaques, followed by seroconversion. In macaques inoculated intrarectally, we detected viremia, virus RNA, or both, in 100 percent of both species, followed by seroconversion. The magnitude and duration of infectious virus in blood of macaques suggest humans infected with Zika virus through sexual transmission will likely generate viremias sufficient to infect competent mosquito vectors. Our results indicate that transmission of Zika virus by sexual intercourse might serve as a virus maintenance mechanism in the absence of mosquito-to-human transmission and could increase the probability of establishment and spread of Zika virus in regions where this virus is not present. -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail [As the authors point out, in an environment where active mosquito transmission of Zika virus is occurring, it is difficult to determine what proportion of cases is due to sexual transmission and what proportion to mosquito transmission. It seems certain that the incidence of sexual Zika virus transmission is underestimated. - Mod.TY] ****** [4] No dengue antibody ADE with Zika virus Date: Fri 23 Jun 2017 [ahead of print] Source: Nature Communications doi:10.1038/ncomms15674 [edited] https://www.nature.com/articles/ncomms15674#auth-1 Petraleigh Pantoja, Erick X. P\u00e9rez-Guzm\u00e1n, Idia V. Rodr\u00edguez, Laura J. White et al. Zika virus pathogenesis in rhesus macaques is unaffected by pre-existing immunity to dengue virus. Zika virus (ZIKV) is a re-emerging virus that has recently spread into dengue virus (DENV) endemic regions and cross-reactive antibodies (Abs) could potentially affect ZIKV pathogenesis. Using DENV-immune serum, it has been shown in vitro that antibody-dependent enhancement (ADE) of ZIKV infection can occur. Here we study the effects of pre-existing DENV immunity on ZIKV infection in vivo. We infect 2 cohorts of rhesus macaques with ZIKV; one cohort has been exposed to DENV 2.8 years earlier and a 2nd control cohort is na\u00efve to flaviviral infection. Our results, while confirming ADE in vitro, suggest that pre-existing DENV immunity does not result in more severe ZIKV disease. Rather our results show a reduction in the number of days of ZIKV viremia compared to na\u00efve macaques and that the previous exposure to DENV may result in modulation of the immune response without resulting in enhancement of ZIKV pathogenesis. Discussion It would be interesting to know whether ADE predisposes utero infection and congenital malformations. Although that is not the focus of this study, our results provide valuable clues that the pre-existence of a long-term immune response to DENV neither enhances the peak of ZIKV viremia nor impairs the course of its infection. In addition, we show that the pre-existing immunity to DENV tends to modulate the innate, humoral and T-cell immune responses. Because fetal abnormalities have been associated with prolonged ZIKV viremia, and more recently, higher viremia has been linked to invasion of the central nervous system (CNS) in macaques, results from our work may suggest that pregnant women with previous exposure to DENV may have limited ZIKV viremia and less tendency to have invasion of CNS. These inferences invigorate the need for further direct and in-depth investigations. Our results reinforce the value of NHP model to understand the complex serological interaction among flaviviruses and to support the design of effective flavivirus vaccines. -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail [It would be interesting to have follow up studies with pregnant monkeys to confirm the author's suggestions that viremia would be suppressed and risk of infection of the placenta and fetus reduced. - Mod.TY] ****** [5] Zika virus tropism Date: Fri 23 Jun 2017 Source: Acta Neuropathologica CommunicationsNeuroscience of Disease20175:50 DOI: 10.1186/s40478-017-0450-8 [edited] https://actaneurocomms.biomedcentral.com/articles/10.1186/s40478-017-0450-8 Stephanie L. Cumberworth, Jennifer A. Barrie,, Madeleine E. Cunningham, Daniely Paulino Gomes de Figueiredo, et al. Zika virus tropism and interactions in myelinating neural cell cultures: CNS cells and myelin are preferentially affected. Abstract The recent global outbreak of Zika virus (ZIKV) infection has been linked to severe neurological disorders affecting the peripheral and central nervous systems (PNS and CNS, respectively). The pathobiology underlying these diverse clinical phenotypes are the subject of intense research; however, even the principal neural cell types vulnerable to productive Zika infection remain poorly characterized. Here we used CNS and PNS myelinating cultures from wild type and Ifnar1 knockout mice to examine neuronal and glial tropism and short-term consequences of direct infection with a Brazilian variant of ZIKV. Cell cultures were infected pre-or post-myelination for various intervals, then stained with cell-type and ZIKV-specific antibodies. In bypassing systemic immunity using ex vivo culture, and the type I interferon response in Ifnar1 deficient cells, we were able to evaluate the intrinsic infectivity of neural cells. Through systematic quantification of ZIKV infected cells in myelinating cultures, we found that ZIKV infection is enhanced in the absence of the type I interferon responses and that CNS cells are considerably more susceptible to infection than PNS cells. In particular, we demonstrate that CNS axons and myelinating oligodendrocytes are especially vulnerable to injury. These results have implications for understanding the pathobiology of neurological symptoms associated with ZIKV infection. Furthermore, we provide a quantifiable ex vivo infection model that can be used for fundamental and therapeutic studies on viral neuroinvasion and its consequences. -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail [Advances in the pathophysiology of Zika virus infection at the celular level are providing model systems that can lead to effective therapeutics. The road to success is likely to be a long one, but the journey has begun. - Mod.TY] ****** [6] Case definition Date: Mon 26 Jun 2017 Source: PloS 1 https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0179725 [edited] http://journals.plos.org/plosone/article?id=10.1371/journal.pone.0179725 Jos\u00e9 Ueleres Braga, Clarisse Bressan, Ana Paula Razal Dalvi Guilherme Amaral Calvet, Regina Paiva Daumas, et al. Accuracy of Zika virus disease case definition during simultaneous Dengue and Chikungunya epidemics. Abstract Background Zika is a new disease in the American continent and its surveillance is of utmost importance, especially because of its ability to cause neurological manifestations as Guillain-Barr\u00e9 syndrome and serious congenital malformations through vertical transmission. The detection of suspected cases by the surveillance system depends on the case definition adopted. As the laboratory diagnosis of Zika infection still relies on the use of expensive and complex molecular techniques with low sensitivity due to a narrow window of detection, most suspected cases are not confirmed by laboratory tests, mainly reserved for pregnant women and newborns. In this context, an accurate definition of a suspected Zika case is crucial in order for the surveillance system to gauge the magnitude of an epidemic. Methodology We evaluated the accuracy of various Zika case definitions in a scenario where dengue and chikungunya viruses co-circulate. Signs and symptoms that best discriminated PCR confirmed Zika from other laboratory confirmed febrile or exanthematic diseases were identified to propose and test predictive models for Zika infection based on these clinical features. Results and discussion Our derived score prediction model had the best performance because it demonstrated the highest sensitivity and specificity, 86.6 percent and 78.3 percent, respectively. This Zika case definition also had the highest values for auROC (0\u2022903) and R ^2 (0\u2022417), and the lowest Brier score 0\u2022096. Conclusions In areas where multiple arboviruses circulate, the presence of rash with pruritus or conjunctival hyperemia, without any other general clinical manifestations such as fever, petechia or anorexia is the best Zika case definition. -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail [This study was based on 659 participating subjects, of whom 138 were PCR positive for Zika virus, 113 for dengue viruses and 45 for chikungunya virus. The remaining cases were classified as other febrile illnesses. It will be interesting to see if the Zika virus infection case definition holds up over time with a larger series of cases due to infection by the 3 viruses. - Mod.TY] [ A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: http://healthmap.org/promed/p/52913.]", "---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ProMED apologizes for technical difficulties that resulted in a delay in sending this email. ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- CYCLOSPORIASIS - CANADA: ONTARIO, BRITISH COLUMBIA ************************************************** A ProMED-mail post http://www.promedmail.org ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases http://www.isid.org Date: Thu 29 Jun 2017 Source: Cision [edited] http://www.newswire.ca/news-releases/public-health-notice---outbreak-of-_Cyclospora_ infections-under-investigation-631627133.html The Public Health Agency of Canada is collaborating with provincial public health partners, the Canadian Food Inspection Agency and Health Canada to investigate locally acquired __Cyclospora_ _ infections in two provinces. The source of the outbreak has not been identified. Previous outbreaks in Canada and the United States (US) have been linked to imported fresh produce. The investigation is ongoing. The risk to Canadians is low. _Cyclospora_ is not found in water or food grown in Canada. The parasite is most common in some tropical and subtropical regions such as the Caribbean, South and Central America, South and South East Asia, the Middle East, and Africa. In Canada, non-travel-related illnesses due to _Cyclospora_ occur more frequently in the spring and summer months. Illnesses among travelers can happen at any time of year. _Cyclospora_ infections can be prevented by ensuring you are consuming fresh produce grown in countries where the parasite is not common, such as Canada, the US and European countries. What is _Cyclospora_? ---------------------- _Cyclospora_ is a microscopic single-celled parasite [protozoan] that is passed in people's feces. If it comes in contact with food or water, it can contaminate food and cause infection in the people who consume it. This causes an intestinal illness called cyclosporiasis. It is unlikely for _Cyclospora_ to be passed from one person to another. Investigation Summary --------------------- In Canada, a total of 20 cases have been reported in 2 provinces: British Columbia (5) and Ontario (15). Individuals became sick between May and early June of this year [2017]. The majority of cases (60 percent) are male, with an average age of 53 years. The investigation into the source of the outbreak is ongoing. To date, no multi-jurisdictional outbreaks of _Cyclospora_ have been linked to produce grown in Canada. The outbreak investigation is active and the public health notice will be updated on a regular basis as the investigation evolves. -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts [Previous outbreaks of __Cyclospora cayetanensis_ in the US and Canada have been attributed to contaminated lettuces and greens imported from Mexico. The information that the cases in this outbreak have been found in two provinces indicates that the outbreak is again linked to food distributed to multiple retailers. - Mod.EP A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: http://healthmap.org/promed/p/264.]", "---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ProMED apologizes for technical difficulties that resulted in a delay in sending this email. ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- AVIAN INFLUENZA, HUMAN (61): CHINA, H7N9 **************************************** A ProMED-mail post http://www.promedmail.org ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases http://www.isid.org In this update: [1] Yunnan [2] Hebei ****** [1] Yunnan Date: Sat 1 Jul 2017 Source: FIC (Flu Information Centre/Flu in China) [edited] http://www.flu.org.cn/en/news_detail?action=ql&uid=MjI0OA&pd=YXRsbXBw&newsId=19565 According to the HFPC of Yunnan province on [28 Jun 2017], during the enhanced influenza and unknown pneumonia surveillance, 4 human H7N9 cases were reported by local CDC and reconfirmed by national CDC. All 4 cases were reported in Wenshan city, and these were the first report of local human H7N9 AIV case in Yunnan since 2017. One patient recovered and had been discharged from hospital, while other 3 patients (in stable condition) remained in designated hospital for treatment and quarantine. There has been no evidence of human-to-human transmission so far. All close contacts are under medical monitoring and no one showed ILI symptoms so far. Wenshan city closed live poultry market since [25 Jun 2017] accordingly. 1) 4-year-old female 2) 33-year-old female 3) 27-year-old male 4) 42-year-old female -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail ****** 2] Hebei Date: Sat 1 Jul 2017 Source: FIC (Flu Information Centre/Flu in China) [edited] http://www.flu.org.cn/en/news_detail?action=ql&uid=MjI0OA&pd=YXRsbXBw&newsId=19564 During the period between [16 and 22 Jun, 2017], the Hebei province reported 3 human H7N9 AIV cases. All 3 cases were residents of Cangzhou city. 1) 71-year-old male 2) 31-year-old male (exported to Beijing) 3) 57-year-old male (exported to Beijing) -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail [As of [15 Jun 2017], a total of 1533 laboratory-confirmed cases of human infection with avian influenza A(H7N9) viruses, including at least 592 deaths, have been reported to WHO. The number of human infections with avian influenza A(H7N9) viruses and the geographical distribution of human cases in the 5th epidemic wave (i.e. onset since [1 Oct 2016]) is greater than in any earlier wave. This suggests that the virus is spreading, and emphasizes that further intensive surveillance and control measures in both the human and animal health sectors are crucial. However, the number of reported confirmed cases has continued to decline over the past few weeks indicating that the peak of cases this wave was reached in mid-February 2017. According to reports received by the Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO) on surveillance activities for avian influenza A(H7N9) viruses in China, positives among virological samples continue to be detected in poultry from live bird markets, commercial and backyard farms. Authorities in China have also announced plans to commence vaccination of domestic poultry in certain areas against infection with avian influenza A(H7) viruses beginning in July 2017 http://www.who.int/influenza/human_animal_interface/Influenza_Summary_IRA_HA_interface_06_15_2017.pdf?ua=1. - Mod.UBA A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: http://healthmap.org/promed/p/351, http://healthmap.org/promed/p/337.]", "---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ProMED apologizes for technical difficulties that resulted in a delay in sending this email. ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- LEGIONELLOSIS - USA (10): (OHIO) NOSOCOMIAL ******************************************* A ProMED-mail post http://www.promedmail.org ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases http://www.isid.org Date: Fri 30 Jun 2017 Source: New York Daily News [edited] http://www.nydailynews.com/news/national/inmates-ohio-prison-diagnosed-legionnaires-disease-article-1.3291473 Two inmates at Ohio's prison hospital have been diagnosed with Legionnaires' disease, causing the facility this week to cut off use of its tap water and install new faucets and filters. Environmental tests have been done in hopes of finding the source of illnesses at the Franklin Medical Center in Columbus, prison officials said. The prison hospital houses close to 600 inmates who need medical and long-term care, some who may be more vulnerable to Legionnaires' disease, a severe form of pneumonia that in some cases can be fatal. The prison also has pregnant inmates. A notice sent by the prison's warden earlier this week after the 2nd illness was confirmed said inmates were not to use the showers and advised against drinking the water. A 2nd, separate section of the prison wasn't affected. Bottled water was being handed out to inmates and the prison's 500 staff members. Most of the faucets and showers now are safe to use after new filters were installed over the past few days, according to an internal memo sent Thursday [29 Jun 2017] and obtained by The Associated Press. Some of the faucets will require special fittings and still were not safe to use, the notice said. Both the male inmates who were diagnosed with Legionnaires' disease have pre-existing health conditions, said JoEllen Smith, a spokeswoman for the prisons department. The union representing workers at the prison said the 2 men who were sickened were in an area near each other. -- Communicated by: Denis Green [ProMED-mail thanks Denis Green for his submission. Legionnaires' disease is usually acquired by inhaling aerosolized _Legionella_, but the disease can also be acquired by aspiration of contaminated potable water in people prone to aspirate, such as debilitated hospitalized patients, and possible by person-to-person transmission has been described (Correia AM, Gon\u00e7alves J, Gomes, JP, et al: Probable person-to-person transmission of legionnaires' disease. N Engl J Med. 2016; 374(5): 497-8; http://www.nejm.org/doi/full/10.1056/NEJMc1505356). - Mod.ML A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: http://healthmap.org/promed/p/237.]", "---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ProMED apologizes for technical difficulties that resulted in a delay in sending this email. ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- E. COLI, EHEC - USA (13): (UTAH) FATALITIES, SUSPECTED EHEC, REQUEST FOR INFORMATION ************************************************************************************ A ProMED-mail post http://www.promedmail.org ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases http://www.isid.org Date: Sun 2 Jul 2017, 12:01 PM Source: Fox13 Now [edited] http://fox13now.com/2017/07/02/e-coli-outbreak-in-southern-utah/ The Southwest Utah Health Department is investigating an _E. coli_ outbreak in Hildale, and family members confirm at least 2 young children have died. The parents of a 6-year-old from Hildale tell Fox 13 News their daughter died of kidney failure as a result of _E. coli_, and they say a young boy who is close friends with the girl and who lives in their housing complex is also deceased. The Southwest Utah Public Health Department states they are investigating an outbreak of _E. coli_ in the Hildale, Utah area. The department states the outbreak appears to be confined to a limited area with, \"little or no risk to the larger community.\" David Heaton, a spokesman for the health department, tells Fox 13 News they have tested the water in the area and are confident the water is not the source of the contamination. \"We're pretty sure it's not from the water,\" Heaton said. \"The tests that we've done there have been clean every time. We're looking at either exposure to an infected animal or to contaminated food, like food poisoning.\" The family said a couple who lives in their complex have been discarding diapers in the yard, and some dogs have been getting into those diapers. Recently the young girl and her mother began cleaning up that debris and came in contact with the dogs, and it was after that contact she became sick. The family says the girl and her mother both got sick, as did a young boy around the same age as the girl who also lives in the housing complex. The family says the girl died several days after getting sick, as did her young friend. The mother was sickened but recovered. According to health officials, _E.coli_ are bacteria found in the environment, foods and intestines of people and animals. While the bacterium is usually harmless, some strains can cause diarrhea, urinary tract infections, respiratory illness, bloodstream infections and other illnesses. Children under 5 and older adults are more likely to develop serious illness, but anyone can be affected. The disease-causing bacteria typically spread when particles of human or animal feces are exposed to the mouth. The particles usually come from unwashed hands, contaminated water or unpasteurized foods or livestock. Symptoms vary but often include stomach cramps, diarrhea, vomiting and fever usually less than 101 deg F [approx. 38 deg C]. Most people get better within 5-7 days. Infections range from mild to serious. A health care provider should be contacted if diarrhea lasts more than 3 days or is accompanied by high fever, blood in the stool, low urine amounts or vomiting to the point that liquid can't be kept down. [Byline: Brock Damjanovich, Mark Green and Lauren Handley] -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts [The posting does not specifically state that the _E. coli_ was an enterohemorrhagic (Shiga toxin producing) strain of which the prototypic strain in _E. coli_ O157:H7. Certainly bacteremia caused by _E. coli_ with either a gastrointestinal or genitourinary source can cause severe illness, kidney failure and death, 2 fatal illnesses related epidemiologically strongly suggest an EHEC cause. ProMED would like more information regarding this potential cluster of cases which may be due to EHEC. The case fatality rate for EHEC is usually below 10 percent. There is significant evidence that the administration of most antimicrobial agents early in EHEC disease may increase the risk of hemolytic uremic syndrome (HUS). Most fatalities are in individuals who develop central nervous system complications in HUS. Since CS Wong and colleagues reported a relative risk of the development of HUS in _E. coli_ O157 infection of 17.3 (95 percent confidence interval 2.2 to 137) (1), it has generally been thought that antimicrobial agents increase HUS risk. In this study, trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole and beta-lactam drugs were those most linked to HUS. Whether other antimicrobial agents would likewise be linked to HUS, whether the same effect would occur in adults, whether non-O157 strains would behave similarly and what the mechanism of the effect is are not clearly known. Overall, trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole (also referred to as cotrimoxazole) and fluoroquinolones seemed to be the prime offenders, both not uncommonly used empirically for perceived bacterial enteritis. As discussed in Kimmitt's paper in Emerging Infectious Diseases, the Shiga toxin genes reside on a lambda-like bacteriophage genome integrated into the bacterial chromosome (2). Different EHEC strains contain various numbers of these phages displaying much diversity and some beginning defective (3). In particular, fluoroquinolones induce high-level expression of previously silent bacteriophage genes with coexpression of the toxin genes. A number of studies have addressed Shiga toxin production and/or release using a variety of antimicrobial agents at subinhibitory and/or suprainhibitory concentrations using a variety of markers for toxin. These include direct immunologic measurement, cytotoxicity assays, and enzyme reporters. It appears that imipenem (4) and rifaximin (5) do not induce toxin production or phage-mediated cell lysis, suggesting that these agents may not increase the risk of HUS and might be useful in management. TJ Ochoa and colleagues found that fluoroquinolones induced Shiga toxin induction much more commonly in O157 than non-O157 strains (5), but Lee and Stein did not (6). References: 1. Wong CS, Jelacic S, Habeeb RL, Watkins SL and Tarr PI. The risk of the hemolytic-uremic syndrome after antibiotic treatment of _Escherichia coli_ O157:H7 infections. N Engl J Med. 2000; 342(26):1930-6; available at http://www.nejm.org/doi/full/10.1056/NEJM200006293422601#t=articleTop. 2. Kimmitt PT, Harwood CR and Barer MR. Toxin gene expression by Shiga toxin-producing _Escherichia coli_: the role of antibiotics and the bacterial SOS response. Emerg Infect Dis. 2000; 6(5):458-65.; available at http://www.cdc.gov/ncidod/eid/vol6no5/kimmett.htm and https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2627954/pdf/10998375.pdf. 3. Hayashi T, Makino K, Ohnishi M, et al. Complete genome of sequence of enterohemorrhagic _Escherichia coli_ O157:H7 and genomic comparison with a laboratory strain K-12. DNA Res. 2001; 8(1): 11-22; available at http://dnaresearch.oxfordjournals.org/content/8/1/11.long. 4. Takahashi K, Narita K, Kato Y, et al. Low-level release of Shiga-like toxin (verocytotoxin) and endotoxin from enterohemorrhagic _Escherichia coli_ treated with imipenem. Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 1997; 41(10): 2295-6; available at http://aac.asm.org/cgi/reprint/41/10/2295?view=long&pmid=9333067. 5. Ochoa TJ, Chen J, Walker CM, Gonzales E and Cleary TG. Rifaximin does not induce toxin production or phage-mediated lysis of Shiga toxin-producing _Escherichia coli_. Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 2007; 51(8): 2837-41; available at http://aac.asm.org/cgi/content/full/51/8/2837?view=long&pmid=17526759. 6. Lee JH and Stein BD. Antimicrobials effective for inhibition of enterohemorrhagic _Escherichia coli_ strains O26, O111, and O157 and their effects on Shiga toxin releases. J Microbiol Biotechnol 2009; 19(10): 1238-43; available at http://www.jmb.or.kr/journal/download.php?Filedir=../submission/Journal/019/&num=3456 Hildale is a city in Washington County, in extreme southwest Utah, United States https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hildale,_Utah. Hildale is a twin city to the better-known Colorado City, Arizona, which together straddle the border between Utah and Arizona. Hildale is the headquarters of the Fundamentalist Church of Jesus Christ of Latter Day Saints. A map showing its location can be found at the above URL. - Mod.LL A county map of Utah can be seen at http://geology.com/county-map/utah-county-map.gif. - CopyEd.AO A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: http://healthmap.org/promed/p/246.]", "---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ProMED apologizes for technical difficulties that resulted in a delay in sending this email. ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- RABIES (27): AMERICAS, USA (MARYLAND) FELINE ******************************************** A ProMED-mail post http://www.promedmail.org ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases http://www.isid.org Date: Fri 30 Jun 2017 Source: ABC2 News [edited] http://www.abc2news.com/news/region/cecil-county/rabid-cat-located-in-elkton Most domestic cats are required by law to be vaccinated for rabies, but in the woods just off Brewster Bridge Road in Elkton, one stray cat has tested positive, and another case is suspected, prompting a warning issued throughout the neighborhood. \"It's concerning because we have pets that stay outside a lot, and my kids are out here a lot,\" said Sheri Wood. Angie Scramlin of the Cecil County Health Department says the 1st sign of a possible outbreak came about 3 weeks ago. \"A person came into the hospital. They had been exposed to a stray cat that really attacked them fairly aggressively. I mean cats can be nasty, but this one really attacked them, biting, clawing and wouldn't let go,\" said Scramlin, \"So it was suspect, but the cat ran off. They weren't able to trap it and test it.\" The victim had to start a series of shots as a precaution against the infectious viral disease when a 2nd cat showed up in their yard weeks later acting strangely. \"In this case, the cat was screaming and screaming loudly, and kind of going in circles,\" said Scramlin. This time, animal services tracked down the animal, and it tested positive for rabies. \"It was a small, white cat about 10 to 12 pounds. It had one blue eye, so it's not your normal calico tabby out there. It kind of was unique enough that if people recognize that they saw that cat in the 10 days prior to that testing last Friday, we want them to come forward,\" added Scramlin. They're also encouraging people in the community to keep a watchful eye on their animals until the stray cats can be rounded up and checked for any further signs of infection. \"They come into our yard. They definitely come into our yard,\" said Wood, \"Our dogs usually chase them out, but sometimes our dogs are inside and the cats will come in.\" This is Cecil County's 3rd reported case of rabies this year [2017]. In January [2017], a stray cat in Port Deposit tested positive, and in May [2017], a raccoon did as well in Chesapeake City. [Byline: Jeff Hager] -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail [Another nice example of why one should make sure your pet cats are routinely vaccinated. - Mod.MHJ A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: http://healthmap.org/promed/p/223.]", "---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ProMED apologizes for technical difficulties that resulted in a delay in sending this email. ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- MEASLES UPDATE (34): EUROPE, AFRICA, USA **************************************** A ProMED-mail post http://www.promedmail.org ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases http://www.isid.org In this update: Europe ---- [1] Romania [2] Italy (Rome) fatal case [3] Italy summary Africa ----- [4] South Sudan USA --- [5] Maine ****** [1] Romania Date: Fri 23 Jun 2017 Source: Medical Express [edited] https://medicalxpress.com/news/2017-06-measles-outbreak-romania.html A measles outbreak affecting several European countries has killed 30 people in Romania, most of them children, health authorities in Bucharest said on Friday [23 Jun 2017]. More than 7200 people in the European Union's 2nd-poorest country have contracted the illness since late 2016, Romania's contagious disease monitoring centre said. There was also a 31st suspected fatality. The respiratory disease, characterised by high fever and small red spots, usually triggers only mild symptoms, but it remains one of the leading causes of death among young children globally. The World Health Organization recommends 2 doses of vaccination, the 1st by a child's 1st birthday, to ensure immunity and prevent outbreaks, saying they should cover 95 percent of the population. But in Romania, due not only to poverty but also a lack of vaccines and poor access to health care, the rate is only 80 percent for the 1st shot and 50 percent for the 2nd. The Romanian government is currently pushing through legislation that would make vaccination obligatory in order for children to be allowed to go to school. Compounding the problem, a growing number of parents are refusing to have their children immunised, with religious groups and public figures also launching anti-vaccination campaigns. The WHO warned in March 2017 about a rising number of measles cases in Europe, with the largest outbreaks in Romania and Italy. France, Germany, Poland, Switzerland and Ukraine were also affected. On Thu [29 Jun 2017], a 6-year-old boy with leukaemia died from measles in Italy. He had an 85-percent chance of being cured of his leukaemia, but his parents refused to have him vaccinated for measles, Italian authorities said. They said that at least 3074 measles cases have been recorded this year [2017], 40 percent of whom had to be hospitalised. The WHO said on Tue [27 Jun 2017] that 43 percent of cases in Europe were in Italy. -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts [See a HealthMap of Romania at http://healthmap.org/promed/p/122. - Mod.LK] ****** [2] Italy, Rome, fatal case Date: Wed 28 Jun 2017 Source: Ansa General News [edited] http://www.ansa.it/english/news/general_news/2017/06/28/unvaccinated-girl-9-died-of-measles-3_851d396c-606e-4858-832b-9112a1eb8464.html A 9-year-old girl died in a Rome hospital on 28 Apr 2017 from complications from a bout of measles, which she had not been vaccinated against, the Bambino Ges\u00f9 Hospital said Wed [28 Jun 2017]. The girl, who lived near Latina south of Rome, was admitted on 19 Apr 2017 with a gene-related disease, a chromosome abnormality. She came down with a fever and conjunctivitis on 14 Apr 2017 and was diagnosed with measles on 26 Apr 2017. The complications that resulted included pneumonia and respiratory insufficiency, the latter of which was cited as cause of death. The government recently made it compulsory to have 12 vaccinations before being allowed into school up to the age of 6. -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail [This points out one reason why it is important for children who are immunocompetent without exacerbating conditions to be vaccinated with MMR (measles, mumps, rubella) vaccine, specifically to prevent infection of those most vulnerable who cannot be vaccinated safely. Maps of Italy can be accessed at http://www.lib.utexas.edu/maps/europe/italy_admin_06.jpg and http://healthmap.org/promed/p/75. - Mod.LK] ****** [3] Italy summary Date: Sat 1 Jul 2017 Source: WEST [edited] http://www.west-info.eu/measles-takes-the-lives-of-two-italians/ In Italy, since the beginning of this year [2017], measles has already claimed the lives of 2 individuals. Complications were recorded in 35% of those with the disease, and 40% reported having been admitted to the hospital. Emergency room visits were necessary in 22% of the cases. And, even if the average age of the patients was 27 years, it is important to take note of the fact that 18% of the individuals were under 4 years of age. These are the latest data published in Italy's weekly bulletin released by the Ministry of Health and the Italian Institute of Health (ISS). The bulletin, in fact, was created to monitor and announce punctually the scenario involving the measles epidemic that has been evolving in Italy since last January [2017]. [Byline: Roberta Lunghini] -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts [A map of the cases by region in Italy and figures on age groups affected, complications, and incidence of measles over time can be found at the URL above. It is assumed that one of the 2 deaths mentioned in this report is the one discussed in the previous post above. - Mod.LK] ****** [4] South Sudan Date: Wed 28 Jun 2017 Source: Sudan Tribune [edited] http://www.sudantribune.com/spip.php?article62853 Lack of funds needed to train vaccinators caused the deaths of 16 children during the botched measles vaccination campaign in South Sudan, an official said on Tue [27 Jun 2017]. \"The measles campaign was carried out by UNICEF [UN Children's Emergency Fund] with the World Health Organization and Ministry of Health. When we asked for funding to train nurses and volunteers who were to administer the vaccines, there was no funding from UNICEF,\" Kapoeta state governor Luis Lobong told the Council of States. 35 children, who received the measles vaccine, fell ill in Kapeota. Last month [May 2017], South Sudan's health minister, Riek Gai Kok attributed the bizarre incident to what he described as typical \"human error.\" However, while appearing before the country's lawmakers on Tue [27 Jun 2017], Gai explained that steps were being taken by the health ministry, WHO and UNICEF to ensure mistakes [do not] occur again. \"We regret the death of the 15 children, who showed the same symptoms after being vaccinated with measles [vaccine]. The health volunteers were not trained, and they mistakenly used one syringe to [vaccinate] many children. We sincerely extend our condolences to the families and the victims of this mistake,\" said Gai. Unconfirmed reports say children as young as 10 years participated as volunteers to administer measles vaccines in the botched campaigns in Kapoeta, despite the lack of electric power to moderate the vaccine's temperature as well as poor handling of medical sets. South Sudanese lawmakers, however, demanded justice for families affected, yet some citizens wanted those officials concerned to be impeached for their alleged failure to provide proper leadership. South Sudan is acknowledged to have some of the worst health indicators in the world. -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts [The deaths of the vaccinated children were completely avoidable. Surely, if public health officials were giving the vaccine to the children, they should know best practices to preserve the safety of the vaccination process, i.e., the importance of changing needles between individuals. It is difficult to imagine that children \"as young as 10\" who would not have that expertise were allowed to give vaccinations. Maps of South Sudan can be seen at https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/b/b0/28_States_of_South_Sudan.png and http://healthmap.org/promed/p/8402. - Mod.LK] ****** [5] Maine Date: Thu 29 Jun 2017 Source: WMTW [edited] http://www.wmtw.com/article/measles-diagnosed-in-maine-for-first-time-in-20-years/10228536 The Maine Center for Disease Control and Prevention is investigating a travel-associated confirmed case of measles in Franklin County. The last reported measles case in Maine was in 1997. The Maine CDC said no other causes are under investigation. \"The Maine CDC is working with clinicians to identify potentially exposed individuals and make appropriate recommendations to prevent transmission,\" State Epidemiologist Dr. Siiri Bennett said in a statement. Health officials said the public may have been exposed to the measles if they were at the locations listed in the URL above during the defined times. The Maine CDC said people potentially exposed should review their vaccine history, and monitor for symptoms. Individuals with symptoms should contact their health care provider for instructions before arriving at the provider's office or hospital. If symptoms are consistent with the disease, testing may be performed to determine whether the individual is infected. Individuals without symptoms should not be tested. Measles is a highly contagious viral disease characterized by fever, rash, cough, runny nose, and red eyes. Measles can cause severe health complications including pneumonia, encephalitis, and death. Measles is transmitted when an infected person coughs or sneezes; infected people are contagious from 4 days before their rash starts through 4 days afterwards. After an infected person leaves a location, the virus remains alive for up to 2 hours on surfaces and in the air. The incubation period -- the period from exposure to onset of symptoms -- is typically 10-14 days but can be as long as 21 days. -- Communicated by: Meghan May University of New England [The Maine CDC is currently working to identify and monitor contacts http://www.wmtw.com/article/measles-diagnosed-in-maine-for-first-time-in-20-years/10228536?src=app. - Mod.LK A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: http://healthmap.org/promed/p/222.]", "---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ProMED apologizes for technical difficulties that resulted in a delay in sending this email. ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- TICK PARALYSIS, CANINE - USA (02): (COLORADO) COMMENTS ****************************************************** A ProMED-mail post http://www.promedmail.org ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases http://www.isid.org [1] Date: Sat 1 Jul 2017 From: Charles H Calisher [edited] Re: ProMED-mail post Tick paralysis, canine - USA: (CO) 20170630.5142678 ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- Perhaps it was due to poor writing but the posting about tick paralysis requires correcting, or at least clarification. The sentences \"Rocky Mountain wood ticks and American dog ticks paralyze dogs. Both are common in Colorado. Only female ticks can cause paralysis by eventually affecting a dog's respiratory system, veterinarians say.\" Whereas it is true that Rocky Mountain wood ticks (_Dermacentor andersoni_) and American dog ticks (_Dermacentor variabilis_) can cause paralysis in dogs (and other vertebrates, including humans), they are not the only ticks that can do this. Ticks of scores of different species also can cause paralysis in vertebrates, 5 in North America. The reason only female ticks can cause paralysis is that only female ticks take blood meals. That the emergency veterinarian said the dog's paralysis \"likely stemmed from genetic issues\" shows that not all veterinarians are alike. The statement by the University of Colorado hospital physician, if quoted correctly, is misleading and incorrect. That people \"with pets should be aware of the potential dangers of tick-borne illnesses\" is true but not relevant to this situation; tick paralysis is not a tick-borne illness. I do not know what \"There are certainly things that are unique to Colorado that we wouldn't necessarily see outside\" means but that \"Rocky Mountain spotted fever and Colorado tick fever\" are 2 diseases \"that are generally exclusive to our state\" is generally incorrect. Rocky Mountain spotted fever, the most frequently reported rickettsial illness in the U.S., caused by a bacterium, _Rickettsia rickettsii_ , has been diagnosed throughout the Americas. Colorado tick fever, caused by a virus (Colorado tick fever virus, family _Reoviridae, genus _Coltivirus_), certainly occurs in Colorado but occurs also in Arizona, California, Idaho, Montana, Nebraska, Nevada, North Dakota, Oregon, South Dakota, Utah, Washington, and Wyoming. -- Charles H. Calisher, Ph.D. Professor Emeritus, Arthropod-borne and Infectious Diseases Laboratory Department of Microbiology, Immunology and Pathology College of Veterinary Medicine and Biomedical Sciences Colorado State University Fort Collins, CO 80523 ****** [2] Date: Sat 1 Jul 2017 From: Kathryn Smith [edited] Tick Paralysis in North Carolina Yes -- we have it here -- I've only seen one case of it personally, but have had clients that report having a dog that had it -- aside from being the flea capitol of the world, we have a wonderful environment for ticks as well! I would think that ER vets would consider this a factor even in dachshunds, amazing though how quickly the pet recovers though. -- Kathryn Smith [Our thanks to Charlie and Kathryn for sharing the benefits of their experience. - Mod.MHJ A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at: http://healthmap.org/promed/p/209.]", "HEPATITIS A - FRANCE: (CENTRE-VAL DE LOIRE) ******************************************* A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Tue 4 Jul 2017, 5:24 AM Source: La Nouvelle Republic [in French, trans Corr. SB, edited] A total of 6 adults and 3 children of a commune were recently infected and are being taken care of by the hospital of Limoges. \"We cannot talk about an epidemic,\" says G\u00e9rard Defoug\u00e8re, Mayor of the Magny, \"but we must remain very vigilant.\" This is the result of the discovery, 10 days ago, of a case of hepatitis A in the commune. \"It was an adult who showed signs of extreme fatigue,\" continued the first magistrate. And then another case arrived and then another ... \"some in the school environment\", since 3 children were affected. The Regional Health Agency was of course alerted and immediately advocated stronger hygiene measures and the drinking of bottled water. \"We have listed 6 cases of adults and 3 cases in children\" who were taken in charge at the hospital of Limoges. \"The first case has been discharged. As for the origins of the virus, this is currently unknown. Analyses are ongoing. All that is certain is that it is necessary to accentuate the hygiene measures by regularly washing the hands and avoiding drinking water of a doubtful origin.\" -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts [With a cluster of acute hepatitis A in a small area in central France, a food or waterborne source is likely. Since, especially in children, hepatitis A infection can be asymptomatic or can be anicteric (without jaundice); it is likely that there are a substantial number of unrecognized cases. ProMED awaits more information regarding the cluster which may also result in secondary cases especially in household or daycare settings - Mod.LL A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  .] [", "MERS-COV (45): SAUDI ARABIA (HAIL) LEBANON ex SAUDI ARABIA, WHO *************************************************************** A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases In this update: [1] Saudi Arabia, 1 new case - Saudi MOH 2-5 Jul 2017 [2] Lebanon - WHO, 4 Jul 2017 ****** [1] Saudi Arabia, 1 new case - Saudi MOH 2-5 Jul 2017 Date: 5 Jul 2017 Source: Saudi MOH [edited] As of today [Wed 5 Jul 2017], there have been a total of: 1673 laboratory-confirmed cases of MERS-CoV infection, including 679 deaths [reported case fatality rate 40.6 percent], 978 recoveries, and 16 currently active cases/infections. [As previously mentioned, the numbers of deaths, recoveries and currently active cases come from my spreadsheet tallies and differ from those listed on the Saudi MOH website; my spreadsheet counts asymptomatic infections.] Since the last ProMED-mail update [1 Jul 2017], there have been a total of: 1 newly confirmed case/infection 1 newly reported fatality, and 4 newly reported recoveries. Information on newly confirmed case/infection with MERS-CoV Date: Tue 4 Jul 2017 - A 57-year-old Saudi female, non-healthcare worker, from Hail [\u1e24\u0101'il Region] currently in stable condition. Classified as a primary case with high risk exposure history still under investigation. Information on newly reported fatality: Date: Wed 5 Jul 2017 - A 27-year-old expat male, non-healthcare worker from Riyadh [Riyadh region] with a history of pre-existing co-morbidities. [reported as a newly confirmed case on 5 Jun 2017 at which time he was noted to be in stable condition. At the time of initial confirmation report, he was classified as a secondary healthcare acquired case in a patient. Information on newly reported recoveries (4 recoveries) - All 4 were from Riyadh Date: Wed 5 Jul 2017 1 - A 59-year-old expat male, non-healthcare worker, with a history of pre-existing co-morbidities, [reported as a newly confirmed case on 14 Jun 2017 at which time he was noted to be in critical condition. At the time of initial confirmation report classification was still pending further investigation. - Mod.MPP] Date: Sun 2 Jul 2017 2 - A 25-year-old Saudi male, healthcare worker, with no co-morbidities [reported as a newly confirmed case on 8 Jun 2017 at which time he was noted to be in stable condition. Classified as a secondary healthcare acquired case in a healthcare worker. - Mod.MPP] 3 - A 34-year-old expat female, healthcare worker, with no history of co-morbidities [reported as a newly confirmed case on 9 Jun 2017 at which time she was noted to be in stable condition, having been identified as an asymptomatic contact of a previously confirmed MERS-CoV infected individual. Classified as a secondary healthcare acquired case in a healthcare worker. - Mod.MPP] 4- A 42-year-old expat male, non-healthcare worker, with no history of co-morbidities [reported as a newly confirmed case on 19 Jun 2017 at which time he was noted to be in stable condition having been identified as an asymptomatic contact of a previously confirmed MERS-CoV infected individual. Classified as a secondary case in a household contact. - Mod.MPP] -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail ****** [2] Lebanon - WHO, 4 Jul 2017 Date: 4 Jul 2017 Source: WHO Emergencies preparedness, response [edited] Middle East respiratory syndrome coronavirus (MERS-CoV) - Lebanon 4 Jul 2017 ------------------------ On [19 Jun 2017], the national IHR focal point of Lebanon reported one additional case of Middle East respiratory syndrome coronavirus (MERS-CoV) infection. Details of the case A 39-year-old male Lebanese national living in Riyadh, Saudi Arabia developed mild symptoms on [8 Jun 2017]. As the patient was a health care worker, and due to enhanced Middle East respiratory syndrome (MERS) surveillance activities ongoing in Riyadh, a nasopharyngeal swab was collected on [11 Jun 2017] in Riyadh, Saudi Arabia, and tested negative for MERS-CoV by PCR at the Riyadh Regional Laboratory. The case is without a history of comorbid conditions. He does not work in a health care facility with active MERS patients, has not had contact with an identified confirmed MERS case, nor has had known contact with a patient with respiratory illness. He has no history of contact with dromedaries in the 14 days prior to the onset of the symptoms. On [11 Jun 2017], the case travelled from Saudi Arabia to Lebanon and reported that he had no symptoms while travelling. On [15 Jun 2017], he developed gastrointestinal symptoms, and a medical investigation was initiated on the same day in Lebanon, whereupon a chest X-ray confirmed the diagnosis of pneumonia. A lower respiratory specimen was collected on [16 Jun 2017] and tested positive for MERS-CoV. The case was reported to the Ministry of Public Health on the same day. The case was placed in home isolation. The case has been asymptomatic since [17 Jun 2017], and 2 consecutive nasopharyngeal swabs and one lower respiratory sample were collected and tested negative for MERS-CoV by PCR, on [17, 19 and 23 Jun 2017], respectively. The patient was released from home isolation on [23 Jun 2017]. All contacts in Lebanon have tested negative for MERS-CoV. Contact tracing in Saudi Arabia and the source of infection are under investigation by the Ministry of Health in Saudi Arabia. Information on newly reported case from Lebanon: Case no. / Date report WHO / City of residence / Age / Sex / HCW / Co-morbidities / Camel exposure / Camel milk / Exposure to other cases / Date of onset of symptoms / Date of hospitalization / Date of lab confirmation / Status / Date of outcome 1 / 2017-06-19 / Riyadh\u2021 / 39 / M / Yes / No / No / No / No / 2017-06-08 / NA / 2017-06-16 / Alive \u2021Country of residence is different to reporting country Globally, 2037 laboratory-confirmed cases of infection with MERS-CoV including at least 710 related deaths have been reported to WHO. Public health response During the investigation of this case, the Ministry of Public Health evaluated the case and his contacts and implemented measures to limit further human-to-human transmission. These measures included: - Proper isolation for confirmed cases (home isolation for asymptomatic patients, and in hospital for symptomatic patients). - Active tracing for all contacts of patients, exposed health care workers and community contacts in Lebanon. - Identification and contact and follow up of contacts in Saudi Arabia and investigation into the patient's source of infection, in collaboration with the Ministry of Health in Saudi Arabia. - Identification of high and low risk contacts among health care workers with daily monitoring for all during incubation period of the 14 days, and performing laboratory testing with nasopharyngeal swabs from all exposed health care workers, regardless of the development of symptoms. All tests among contacts have been negative. - Identification of high and low risk contacts among households with daily monitoring for all during incubation period of the 14 days, and PCR testing for symptomatic contacts. No symptoms were observed among household contacts. - Enforcement of infection prevention and control measures at the hospital. - Sending positive specimens to reference labs for confirmation and sequencing. The Ministry of Public Health in Lebanon is communicating with the Ministry of Health in Saudi Arabia for follow up of health care workers and social contacts of the patient while he was in Saudi Arabia. The patient had not worked in a health care facility where recent MERS cases have been reported, but had initially been tested in Riyadh on [11 Jun 2017] as part of enhanced surveillance activities in Riyadh due to the clusters of MERS cases previously reported in the Disease Outbreak News published on [13 Jun 2017, 19 Jun 2017, and 28 Jun 2017]. WHO risk assessment MERS-CoV causes severe human infections resulting in high mortality and has demonstrated the ability to transmit between humans. So far, the observed non-sustained human-to-human transmission has occurred mainly in health care settings. This is the 2nd case of laboratory-confirmed MERS-CoV reported from Lebanon. One case of MERS has previously been reported in Lebanon on 8 May 2014 (See Disease Outbreak News published on 15 May 2014). The notification of additional cases does not change the overall risk assessment. WHO expects that additional cases of MERS-CoV infection will be reported from the Middle East, and that cases will continue to be exported to other countries by individuals who might acquire the infection after exposure to animals or animal products (for example, following contact with dromedaries) or human source (for example, in a health care setting). WHO continues to monitor the epidemiological situation and conducts risk assessments based on the latest available information. -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail [Today's update has, in essence, 2 newly confirmed cases related to MERS-CoV transmission in Saudi Arabia. One, reported on 4 Jul 2017 by the Saudi MOH, is an individual from Hail whose possible high risk exposures are still under investigation. The other is the case reported by Lebanon with a history of living in Riyadh Saudi Arabia (see MERS-CoV (44): Lebanon ex Saudi Arabia, Saudi Arabia, exp. antiviral, RFI http://promedmail.org/post/20170701.5144892 for initial reports of this case). Of interest is that this individual is a healthcare worker working in a facility in Riyadh with no known MERS-CoV infected individuals and did not have a history of caring for individuals with a history of respiratory illnesses. Looking at his clinical illness, he appeared to have had mild respiratory symptoms on 11 Jun 2017, at which time a PCR of a nasopharyngeal swab was negative for the MERS-CoV. Four days later, he had the onset of gastrointestinal symptoms, was found to have pneumonia, and a lower respiratory specimen taken on 16 Jun 2017 was found to be positive for MERS-CoV. So, perhaps looking at patients seen with gastrointestinal symptoms as possible exposures in his case might point to possible missed MERS-CoV infected individuals. Of note is the prior observation that upper respiratory specimens did not necessarily have a high capture rate for PCR testing for the MERS-CoV in the past, so it is possible this infection was missed due to the nature of the testing specimen. Or perhaps at that time he did not have MERS-CoV infection but may have been exposed at the time of seeking healthcare assistance (to be a devil's advocate...). According to the WHO update, there have now been a total of 2037 laboratory confirmed cases of MERS-CoV infection, including at least 710 related deaths reported globally (reported case fatality rate at least 34.9 percent). Maps showing the locations within Saudi Arabia for reported cases and deaths can be found at the source URLs in the update report. HealthMap/ProMED maps can be found at: Saudi Arabia: Lebanon: .  - Mod.MPP] [", "POLIOMYELITIS UPDATE (15): SYRIA (AR RAQQAH) NEW CASE, PAKISTAN, VIOLENCE ************************************************************************* A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases In this update: [1] Syria, new case - Raqqah, media report [2] Pakistan, violence against vaccinator, media report ****** [1] Syria, new case - Raqqah, media report Date: 4 Jul 2017 Source: Stat News [edited] The discovery of another Syrian child paralyzed by polio vaccine viruses in rebel-held Raqqa has the World Health Organization and UNICEF in talks with the Syrian government over whether an emergency vaccination effort can be mounted there. The new case is the 2nd to be documented in Raqqa, part of a larger polio outbreak in Syria that totals 24 cases of paralysis caused by vaccine viruses. The other cases are in Mayadeen district in the Deir-Ez-Zor governorate of eastern Syria. The new case, however, suggests the outbreak may be spreading in Raqqa, the self-proclaimed capital of the Islamic State, said Michel Zaffran, director of the WHO's polio program. Officials acknowledge that carrying out an emergency vaccination effort there could be exceedingly complicated. \"It is still under discussion due to military activity in the area,\" Zaffran told STAT in an email. If it goes ahead, the outbreak response in Raqqa would attempt to vaccinate 120 000 children under the age of 5 with a special formulation of oral polio vaccine [OPV]. Health officials would also try to vaccinate 44 000 children with injectable polio vaccine [IPV], the type used in the United States and other affluent countries. An emergency vaccination program for Deir-Ez-Zor and in the southern part of Shadadi district in Hasaka governorate is set to begin Saturday [8 Jul 2017]. Vaccine for that effort is already in Damascus, Zaffran said. The 1st round of vaccinations will target 328 000 children in the 2 governorates. Already, 355 vaccination teams and 61 supervisors are on standby to begin the work. Teams will go house to house in some areas and operate from a fixed position in others. That, at least, is the plan. But the agencies behind the response know that the shifting winds of war in Syria could pose serious challenges for their work. Vaccine refusal has also been a problem in Deir-Ez-Zor in the past, with some parents reluctant to allow their children to be vaccinated, according to an update released Tuesday [4 Jul 2017] by the WHO. The Syrian cases are caused by vaccine-derived polioviruses, viruses from the oral polio vaccine used in some developing countries. The U.S. discontinued use of the oral vaccine in 2000. Oral polio vaccine is made using live but weakened viruses. The original version contained components to protect against all 3 polioviruses, types 1 through 3. Type 2 polioviruses stopped circulating nearly 20 years ago and last year [2016], that component was removed from the oral vaccine. The oral vaccine is highly effective, but it has some rare and serious side effects. The weakened viruses can spread from a vaccinated child to other children with whom he or she is in contact. If the viruses continue to spread -- because children in the area where they develop haven't been fully immunized against polio -- they can mutate to become virulent again. If they spread long enough, they can regain the power to cripple. The outbreak in Syria is caused by type 2 vaccine viruses. The oral vaccine that will be used to try to extinguish the outbreak is a single-strain oral vaccine that protects against those viruses. [Byline: Helen Branswell] -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail [It is unfortunate that another case of the cVDPV2 has been identified in Raqqah. A 1st case had been confirmed approximately 2 weeks ago (see Poliomyelitis update (13): Syria (DY, RA), global http://promedmail.org/post/20170622.5124548 and Poliomyelitis update (12): Syria (DY, RA), susp. cases http://promedmail.org/post/20170621.5122019 for more details on the 1st case). At the time of confirmation of the 1st case, it was unclear whether there had been contact with individuals in Deir-al-Zour or travel there to explain the case. With the confirmation of a 2nd case in Raqqah, it confirms there is local transmission of the cVDPV2 virus in Raqqah. Unfortunately, Raqqah is an area with extremely difficult access given the civil unrest in Syria, making vaccination activities challenged. Note that the initial vaccination activities planned to begin this coming Saturday (8 Jul 2017) are planned for Deir-al-Zour governorate and the southern district of Al Hasaka governorate, which borders Deir-al-Zour to the north. A map of Syria showing governorates can be found at  . The HealthMap/ProMED map of Syria can be found at:  . - Mod.MPP] ****** [2] Pakistan, violence against vaccinator - media report Date: 2 Jul 2017 Source: Hindustani Times [edited] A polio worker has been gunned down by 2 unidentified men in a northwestern province of Pakistan where the crippling disease remains endemic. More than 100 people have been killed in such attacks since December 2012. A technician of the Expanded Programme on Immunisation (EPI) was shot on Saturday [1 Jul 2017] by motorbike riders armed with assault rifles while he was returning to his base from an outreach campaign in Swabi district, police said on Sunday [2 Jul 2017]. The attackers managed to flee after committing the crime, The Express Tribune reported. The technician was posted by the health department in Narnji village, which borders Buner district of the Khyber Pakhtunkhwa province. Police reached the scene, cordoned it off, and took the body into custody, it said. A search operation was conducted, but no arrests have been made so far. Nobody claimed responsibility for the attack, but Taliban militants have attacked polio workers in the past. Pakistan is one of only 3 countries where the crippling disease remains endemic. Islamist militants consider anti-polio vaccines to be a Western conspiracy to sterilise Muslims. The Islamists' opposition to all forms of immunisation grew after the Central Intelligence Agency (CIA) organised a fake vaccination drive to help track down Al Qaeda's former leader Osama bin Laden in the Pakistani garrison town of Abbottabad. He was killed there by US forces in 2011. -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail [As noted in the above media report, this is not the 1st time there has been violence directed at healthcare workers responsible for vaccination activities. The Northwestern region of Pakistan, now called Khyber Pakhtunkhwa province, and the FATA (Federally Administered Tribal Authorities) are areas that have been undergoing civil unrest for years. As in the situation in Syria, extremist factions have been blocking vaccination activities, and in the case of Pakistan (and in Northern Nigeria), vaccinators have been subjected to violence and death at the hands of extremists. This has created growing pockets of unvaccinated individuals, which leave an opening for transmission of the wild poliovirus as well as the circulating vaccine-derived polioviruses that have reverted their neuro-virulence and cause paralytic polio as well, a very serious obstacle to the goal of polio eradication (and measles elimination as well). The use of children as pawns in these political fights, ignoring science, is a very sad situation globally. The HealthMap/ProMED map of Pakistan can be found at:  . - Mod.MPP] [", "KYASANUR FOREST DISEASE - INDIA (12): (KARNATAKA), PREVENTIVE MEASURES ********************************************************************** A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Wed 5 Jul 2017 01:06 IST Source: The Hindu [edited] Apart from the drive to administer vaccine to people in areas identified as vulnerable to Kyasanur Forest Disease (KFD), also known as monkey fever, it has been decided to introduce changes in the method in which the insecticide is administered to cattle in the affected areas to prevent the outbreak of the disease. It is a known fact that domestic cattle, that venture into forest for grazing, also play host to the ticks that spread KFD. The Department of Animal Husbandry has suggested to the State government to provide pour-on solutions of flumethrin and cypermethrin, and pyrethroid insecticides to control ticks in cattle in the areas affected by KFD. It may be mentioned here that 4 persons had died by KFD in the district in 2016-17 and 48 positive cases were reported during this period. More positive cases were reported in Kudumallige Gram Panchayat limits in Tirthahalli taluk. KFD is a tick-borne viral infection that spreads from monkeys to humans. At present, vaccination is provided for humans against the disease in a 5-km [3.1 miles] radius where positive cases among people or monkeys are reported. Kiran SK, Taluk Health Officer, Tirthahalli, told The Hindu that it there is a plan to provide vaccination against KFD to 55 000 persons in the district in the years 2017-18. The vaccination drive will commence from the 1st week of September [2017]. Ample stock of the vaccine that is produced at the Institute of Animal Health and Veterinary Biologicals, Bengaluru, has been maintained in the district, he said. Earlier, pyrethroid insecticide was provided in oil-bound form and was administered on cattle topically after mixing it with water. As its application was laborious and harmful in humans as well as in cattle, providing the insecticide in the form of pour-on solutions to combat the ticks in an effective manner, has been a preferable option. At a meeting held at the Taluk Panchayat in Tirthahalli on KFD, veterinary experts opined that the administration of this pour-on solution is more efficient The flumethrin pour-on can be applied topically on the vertebral column of the cattle. According to sources, the Department of Animal Husbandry has requested the State government to provide pyrethroid insecticide in pour-on form worth Rs 3 lakh [USD 0.05] for distribution among the cattle owners in the areas affected by KFD. Preventive measures Mr Kiran said that the KFD virus becomes active after the conclusion of monsoon. To prevent the outbreak of the disease among humans, the officials of the Forest Department have been asked to inform the Department of Health and Family Welfare on the unnatural death of monkeys in the forest. If laboratory tests confirm the presence of KFD virus in dead monkeys, the vaccination against the disease can be undertaken among the humans residing in an area of 5-km [3.1 miles] radius to prevent the spread, he added. [Byline: Veerendra PM] -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail [There is a need to create awareness on how to avoid tick bites and KFD vaccination facilities should be available in the affected areas. KFD typically occurs during the dry season from November through May, which correlates with increased activity of the nymphs of ticks. Exposure to adult ticks and nymphs in rural or outdoor settings increases the risk of infection; herders, forest workers, farmers, and hunters are particularly at increased risk of contracting the disease. Vaccination and personal protective measures against tick bites are keys to prevent KFD. Flumethrin is a pyrethroid insecticide which is used externally in veterinary medicine against parasitic insects and ticks on cattle, sheep, goats, horses, and dogs [ ]. Researchers have demonstrated excellent results with use of flumethrin against heavy tick infestations [ ]. Therefore the plan to use flumethrin or equivalent pesticides on the cattle in the region can be a very important measure to minimize the vector involved in the transmission of the virus. - Mod.UBA A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  .] [", "YELLOW FEVER UPDATE - AFRICA (02): ANGOLA VACCINATION ****************************************************** A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Tue 4 Jul 2017 Source: Releif Web [edited] Over 8000 people were vaccinated against yellow fever during a campaign held in the last 15 days in Mulondo commune, Matala Municipality of the southern Huila Province. According to the chief nurse of the Mulondo health centre, Jo\u00e3o Pintal Gon\u00e7alves, the vaccination campaign covered adults and children, representing 82 percent of the predicted target. Yellow fever is a dangerous infectious disease caused by a virus transmitted by mosquitoes. -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts [The yellow ever (YF) outbreak, which was 1st detected in Angola in December 2015, caused 965 confirmed cases across the 2 countries, with thousands more cases suspected. The last case detected in Angola was on 23 June 2016. Huila province was a very early site at the beginning of the YF outbreak in Angola. It seems likely that this province was included in the massive YF vaccination campaigns carried out in Angola. There is no indication in the above report that the current vaccination campaign is in response to concern about new cases or of potential spill-over from the sylvan (forest) endemic transmission cycle of YF virus. - Mod.TY A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map showing the location of Angola can be accessed at: A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  .] [", "CRIMEAN-CONGO HEMORRHAGIC FEVER - PAKISTAN (07): BALOCHISTAN ************************************************************ A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Thu 6 Jul 2017 Source: Dawn [edited] Congo virus was confirmed on [Wed 5 Jul 2017] in another patient undergoing treatment at the Fatima Jinnah Chest Hospital. RM was brought to the hospital a few days ago from Loralai. \"We had sent a blood sample of Raz Muhammad to Karachi, which confirmed that the patient has been suffering from Congo virus,\" said Dr Naseer Ahmed, in-charge of the hospital's isolation ward. He said a 15-year-old girl was brought to the hospital in serious condition on [Tue 4 Jul 2017] night from the Pishin area with her mouth and nose bleeding. \"Blood sample of the patient identified as RB was also sent to Karachi for test,\" he said. Dr Naseer said that an 8-year-old girl from Loralai, who also had Congo virus symptoms, was recovering fast. -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail [According to the report above, one case has been laboratory confirmed for CCHF while the results are awaited for the 2nd case. Raising awareness on preventive measures and ensuring that precautionary measures are taken, particularly by the high-risk groups such as workers in the livestock industry and healthcare is needed. Precautions against tick bites, during contact with animals and infected people will help to reduce CCHF transmission. WHO recommended measures to reduce the risk of transmission of CCHF, it can be accessed at : . - Mod.UBA A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  .] [", "BLUEBERRY RUST - CHINA: FIRST REPORT (SICHUAN) ********************************************** A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: June 2017 Source: European Plant Protection Organization (EPPO) Reporting Service 6/2017/122 [edited] In 2015, symptoms of leaf rust were observed in several blueberry (_Vaccinium corymbosum_) fields in 4 localities (Wenjiang, Shuangliu, Dujiangyan, Yaan) in Sichuan province. Blueberry leaf rust symptoms were 1st observed in April, causing extensive defoliation in the following months. Random field surveys were performed in early October [2015] to determine the incidence of the disease in Wenjiang by assessing 20 leaves from 100 plants of each cultivar. The disease incidence was estimated to be 87.2, 5.1, 3.5, and 0.0 percent on cvs Sharpblue, Misty, Bluegold, and O'Neill, respectively. Laboratory analysis (morphology, PCR and sequencing, pathogenicity test) confirmed the presence of _Thekopsora minima_ (EPPO Alert List) in symptomatic leaf samples. -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail [Blueberry (leaf) rust can be caused by the fungus _Thekopsora minima_ and also another rust species (_Naohidemyces vaccinii_), depending on the region. The disease affects a range of plants in the Ericaceae family, including blueberry, bilberry, cranberry (_Vaccinium_ spp) and ornamentals such as rhododendrons and heathers. Symptoms may include yellow leaf spots on the upper surfaces of young leaves, followed by orange pustules developing on leaf undersides which release the spores. In severe cases or on highly susceptible cultivars, leaves turn brown and drop prematurely resulting in serious defoliation and potentially death of the plant. Rust spores are spread by wind over long distances and by splashing rain and mechanical means locally. Infected plant material, including fruit and budwood, poses a high risk of spreading the disease. The rusts can overwinter on evergreen blueberry leaves or alternative hosts in milder climates. Southern highbush varieties are most susceptible. Disease management for rusts is extremely difficult and relies mainly on timely fungicide applications, choice of crop cultivars, phytosanitation, and control of pathogen reservoirs. Crop monitoring for early discovery of infection is important so action can be taken to limit the spread of the pathogens as well as build-up of inoculum. Maps China (with provinces): Pictures Rust symptoms on blueberry:  ,  ,  , and Links Information on blueberry leaf rusts:  (with pictures),  ,  , and _T. minima_ taxonomy and synonyms: and EPPO Alert List:  . - Mod.DHA A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  .] [", "MELOIDOGYNE ENTEROLOBII ROOT KNOT, YAM - NIGERIA: FIRST REPORT ************************************************************** A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: June 2017 Source: European Plant Protection Organization (EPPO) Reporting Service 6/2017/113 [edited] _Meloidogyne enterolobii_ (EPPO A2 List) is reported for the first time from Nigeria. During a nematode survey, tubers of _Dioscorea rotundata_ (yam) showing galls were collected from markets and farmer's fields from 2012 to February 2013. Laboratory analysis (isozyme patterns, PCR, pathogenicity tests) confirmed the identity of the nematode in samples collected from [several] Nigerian states. This is also the first time that _M. enterolobii_ is found causing galls on _D. rotundata_. -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail [Root knot nematodes (_Meloidogyne_ species) attack a wide range of plants and cause significant economic losses in many vegetable and fruit crops. The genus contains around 70 species and is found worldwide in tropical and subtropical regions in many types of soil. Symptoms may include stunting, wilting, and leaf chlorosis, and large galls are formed throughout the root system affecting plant vigour and even killing the host. Affected plants may show increased sensitivity to other bacterial or fungal pathogens. The nematodes can persist in the soil for years and are spread by plant material, soil, and mechanical means (for example contaminated equipment). Once they have been established in an area, it is difficult to control or eradicate them. Disease management requires an integrated approach including phytosanitary and cultural measures, nematicides, and use of resistant crop varieties. _M. enterolobii_ (synonym _M. mayaguensis_) is polyphagous and, although its precise host range is still unknown, has been found on many economically important crops including potato, coffee, soybean, sweet potato, beans, guava, melons, and several solanaceous and cucurbit vegetables. While it originates in subtropical areas, it also poses a serious threat to glasshouse crops in cooler regions. It is considered an emerging and particularly aggressive pathogen with increased virulence against crop varieties resistant to other root knot nematodes. For example, it is able to reproduce on tobacco, capsicum, watermelon, and tomato varieties (including root stocks) resistant to other _Meloidogyne_ species. Elsewhere in the region, it has also been reported on potato and guava in South Africa (ProMED-mail post http://promedmail.org/post/20130918.1951868). Maps Nigeria: Nigerian states: Africa (overview): Pictures Root knot (_Meloidogyne_ spp.) damage on - potato tubers:  ,  and - sweet potato: and - capsicum: _M. enterolobii_, microscopy: and Root knot nematode and gall: Links Information on _M. enterolobii_:  ,  ,  and Information on root-knot (and other) nematodes:  and via _M. enterolobii_ taxonomy: EPPO A2 quarantine list: - Mod.DHA] [", "CHOLERA, DIARRHEA AND DYSENTERY UPDATE (66): ASIA (YEMEN) ********************************************************* A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Wed 5 Jul 2017 Source: CNN [edited] The death toll continues to rise in Yemen, where a cholera outbreak has been spreading for months, according to the WHO. There have been 275 987 suspected cholera cases and 1634 deaths from the illness between [27 Apr and 5 Jul 2017], the WHO said in a statement [Wed 5 Jul 2017]. Children under the age of 15 make up 41 percent of these cases, and people older than 60 account for 33 percent of the deaths. \"If you get caught early in the morning with this and you don't get treated by the end of the day, then you really have a problem,\" WHO spokesman Christian Lindmeier said. \"A weak elderly person could really be dead by the end of the day.\" The WHO said in a statement last week, \"we are now facing the worst cholera outbreak in the world.\" Cholera is caused by ingestion of _Vibrio cholera_ bacteria, which are spread through water or food that is contaminated with feces. Up to 80 percent of people with cholera don't have symptoms, but they are still capable of spreading it. Those who do show symptoms have a sudden onset of watery diarrhea, which can lead to death by severe dehydration. About 14.5 million people in Yemen don't have access to clean water and sanitation, according to the WHO. All but 2 of the nation's governorates have been hit by the outbreak. The WHO has partnered with the United Nations Children's Fund and local health authorities to deliver medication and aid to combat the ongoing outbreak, including the establishment of 45 diarrhea treatment centers and 236 oral rehydration therapy corners. Lindmeier said it is essential for people who are infected to rehydrate immediately. \"The biggest challenge is reaching people,\" he said. \"This is great. This is a major effort and a huge logistical effort, but people need to know that they can get there. People need to know that they can find these places.\" Efforts have been complicated by Yemen's civil war, which has left more than 18.8 million people in need of humanitarian assistance, according to the WHO. Many of the country's trained medical personnel have fled or been killed as the conflict intensified over the past 2 years, said Juliette Touma, UNICEF's regional chief of communications for the Middle East and North Africa. Touma traveled to Yemen in early June [2017] to see what work was being done and said she was impressed by the dedication of health workers however, she couldn't help but think about all the people who still needed relief. \"What I kept thinking about was all of these children who couldn't actually make it to medical care because they live in the remote parts of Yemen and the rural areas where there are no facilities, or those who couldn't afford to pay,\" Touma said. Since the outbreak began, campaigns and community volunteers across the country have been trying to spread the message of how to prevent cholera, she said, including how to clean water, to wash food before eating it and to take general hygienic measures. But Touma said there is a lot more to be done. \"As long as we have more reports and suspected cases of cholera, and as long as the number of suspected cases increases -- and it has been increasing by the day -- we can't unfortunately say there has been progress,\" Touma said. \"There is a cure for cholera, we can cure it, and that is very much dependent on getting in essential supplies, but we need to get more. We need to get more dedicated personnel.\" [Byline: Daniella Emanuel] -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail [The statistics of the dreadfully impressive ongoing epidemic in Yemen in 2017 are: Date (2017) / Cases / Deaths 8 May / 1360 / 25 11 May / 2752 / 51 13 May / 8595 / 115 14 May / 11 000 / 180 17 May / 17 200 / 209 19 May / 23 500 / 242 21 May / 29 300 / 315 22 May / 35 217 / 361 24 May / 42 207 / 420 27 May / 51 832 / 471 30 May / 65 300 / 532 2 Jun / 73 700 / 605 4 Jun / 86 400 / 676 5 Jun / 91 400 / 728 6 Jun / 96 000 / 746 7 Jun / 101 820 / 789 10 Jun / 116 700 / 869 12 Jun / 124 002 / 923 14 Jun / 140 116 / 989 16 Jun / 151 000 / 1054 19 Jun / 166 976 / 1146 21 Jun / 179 548 / 1205 23 Jun / 200 000 / 1310 26 Jun / 219 000 / 1400 28 Jun / 231 364 / 1439 30 Jun / 240 000 / 1500 4 Jul / 275 987 / 1634 To be consistent with past posts, the date is the day prior to the specific posting but, as this one, may not reflect the data point day. There is with no clear sign of the numbers slowing down. The percentage of symptomatic cases in cholera depends in part on the particular biotype. If we use the 20 percent figure cited in this posting and add to the 275 987 the reported cases in 2016 through early 2017 (22 181), a total of 298 168 cases have occurred. This suggests about 1.5 million infections may have occurred country-wise. In the last complete year of data (2015), WHO ( ) reported a total of 172 454 cases worldwide in 42 countries. - Mod.LL A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  .] [", "BOTULISM - UKRAINE (02): FATALITIES, ANTITOXIN AVAILABILITY *********************************************************** A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Tue 4 Jul 2017 Source: The Mice Times of Asia [edited] In Ukraine since the beginning of the year [2017], there have been 76 cases of botulism, 8 of them fatal. This was reported during a briefing by the acting Minister of health Ulyana Suprun. However, she noted that on as of [4 Jul 2017] in Ukraine there is the availability of an antitoxin against botulism. The Canadian product was transferred via the framework of the UN development program. Ukraine has not had this product since 2014. Funds for the purchase of this drug had not even budgeted. This supply allows for use in the treatment of new cases of infection with botulism. -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts [Classically, botulism is a foodborne disease caused by the ingestion of preformed toxin, although there also exists wound botulism (in which _Clostridium botulinum_ spores germinate in a wound), and infant botulism (in which the spores germinate in the intestinal tract). Types A, B, and E of human botulism are the commonest. Although all types have a similar symptom complex, Hughes and colleagues report that type E is much more likely to produce initial lethargic mental status and more autonomic dysfunction (2). In Ukraine, many of the cases are type E related to the ingestion of salted or dried fish. References ---------- 1. Weber JT, Hibbs RG, Darwish A, et al. A massive outbreak of type E botulism associated with traditional salted fish in Cairo. J Infect Dis. 1993;167(2):451-4. Abstract available at:  . 2. Hughes JM, Hatheway CL, Ostroff SM: Botulism. In: Scheld WM, Whitley RJ, Durack DT, editors. Infections of the central nervous system. 2nd edition. Philadelphia: Lippincott-Raven, 1997, 615-28. - Mod.LL A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  .] [", "BURKHOLDERIA THAILANDENSIS - CHINA: (CHONGQING) FATAL, INCREASED VIRULENCE ************************************************************************** A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Thu 6 Jul 2017 Source: Emerging Infectious Diseases [in press] [edited] Human Infection with Burkholderia thailandensis, China, 2013 ------------------------------------------------------------ _Burkholderia thailandensis_ is closely related to _B. pseudomallei_, the causative agent of melioidosis (1). _B. thailandensis_ shares most virulence factors and extensive genomic similarity with _B. pseudomallei_ but can be distinguished by its ability to assimilate arabinose and different rRNA sequences (2,3). Little is known about _B. thailandensis_ infection in humans. Two case reports described soft tissue infection and pneumonia with sepsis in Thailand and the USA (4,5). We describe a clinical investigation of human infection with _B. thailandensis_ in Chongqing, China. In October 2013, a 67-year-old man in Chongqing was hospitalized with a 13-day history of fever, productive cough with white sputum, and shortness of breath. Symptoms had not improved after antimicrobial drug treatment at a local clinic. The patient denied contact with any sick persons and any environmental exposure. Empirical treatment with meropenem was used to prompt resolution of the patient's symptoms before culture results were received. During the 6-day treatment course, the patient was transferred to Chongqing Infectious Disease Hospital for treatment. Subsequently, his general condition worsened, and his family wished to have him close to home. He was discharged and died 2 days later. Laboratory evaluations of blood samples performed at the time of the patient's admission showed a leukocyte count of 20 720/microL with a markedly elevated 91.5 percent neutrophils, aspartate aminotransferase level of 75.5 U/L (reference range 15.0-40.0 U/L), alanine aminotransferase level of 85.0 U/L (reference range 9.0-50.0 U/L), interleukin-6 level of 352.1 pg/mL (reference range 0-7 pg/mL), and procalcitonin level of 24.37 ng/mL (reference range 0-0.25 ng/mL). A computed tomography scan of the patient's chest showed a thick-walled cavitary lesion at the posterior segment of the right upper lobe measuring 7.9 X 6.1 cm and multiple nodules in both lung fields (Figure 1 - for figures, see original URL - Mod.LL). On day 6 of the patient's hospitalization, we observed via microscopy that the positive blood culture contained many gram-negative rod-shaped bacteria (Figure 2, panel A). The colonies were smooth and glossy, with silver pigmentation, on sheep blood agar (Figure 2, panel B). The VITEK 2 COMPACT system (bioMerieux, Marcy L'Epermiltoile, France) identified the isolated strain as _B. pseudomallei_ (97 percent probability; bionumber 0003451513500211). The API 20NE system (bioMerieux) also identified the isolated strain as _B. pseudomallei_ (50.5 percent probability; index 1157577). However, the biochemical profiles of the API 20NE system, including arabinose assimilation, identified the isolated strain as _B. thailandensis_, based on the mode of artificial interpretation. We analyzed the 16S rDNA sequence of strain BPM with nucleotide BLAST ( ) and found a 100 percent similarity with _B. thailandensis_ (GenBank accession nos. CP000085.1 and CP000086.1). These results indicate that commercially available phenotypic assays are not ideal for the identification of _B. thailandensis_, which has not yet been incorporated into the databases of identification systems (6,7). Moreover, the arabinose assimilation proved to be an effective, simple, and accurate method for differentiating _B. thailandensis_ from _B. pseudomallei_. When _B. pseudomallei_ is presumptively identified, arabinose assimilation should be emphasized in clinical laboratories. We compared the virulence of the isolated strain with _B. thailandensis_ E264 (strain ATCC 700388) in BALB/c mice. _B. thailandensis_ E264 is an environmental isolate from northeast Thailand. The clinically isolated _B. thailandensis_ from this study was defined as strain BPM. Groups of 5 mice were inoculated with a 7 log10 CFU of each isolate and observed for a period of 7 days after infection. A total of 4 fifths of the mice infected with strain BPM died within 1 week of challenge. _B. thailandensis_ could be isolated from the bloodstream of mice at the time of death. In contrast, all mice with _B. thailandensis_ E264 infection survived over a 1-week monitoring period (Figure, panel A). The histologic findings were notable for early dissemination to the liver and lung (Figure, panel B). We observed multiple large, necrotizing foci in the livers of mice infected with strain BPM and alveolar-based neutrophilic inflammation in the strain BPM infection group. In addition, the inflammatory infiltrate and lung hyperemia were raised in the BPM-infected mice. This finding is consistent with the clinical case in our study, which appeared as pneumonia and sepsis. Overall, these experiments confirm that strain BPM is a virulent pathogen. We performed comparative genomics to reveal the pathogenic mechanism of strain BPM. The BPM strain and _B. thailandensis_ species share a large proportion of virulence factors. When compared with the reference genome sequences of _B. thailandensis_ E264, _B. thailandensis_ 2002721723, and _B. thailandensis_ E444, the specific virulence factors of VirB/VirD4 type IV secretion system, HSI-I, and WcbR were indicated in strain BPM (Table) (8-10). These specific virulence factors may represent a transition toward a new virulent form. In conclusion, when considering _B. pseudomallei_ infection, clinicians should also consider the possibility of _B. thailandensis_ infection. _B. thailandensis_ is not identified with use of commercially available phenotypic assays and may be mistaken for _B. pseudomallei_. In the future, deep analysis of the complete genome would be helpful in understanding the evolution of _B. thailandensis_ and its adaptation to the environment. References ---------- 1. Ngamdee W, Tandhavanant S, Wikraiphat C, et al: Competition between _Burkholderia pseudomallei_ and _B. thailandensis_. BMC Microbiol. 2015;15: 56. Available at:  . 2. Yu Y, Kim HS, Chua HH, et al: Genomic patterns of pathogen evolution revealed by comparison of _Burkholderia pseudomallei_, the causative agent of melioidosis, to a virulent _Burkholderia thailandensis_. BMC Microbiol. 2006;6: 46. Available at:  . 3. Haraga A, West TE, Brittnacher MJ, Skerrett SJ and Miller SI: _Burkholderia thailandensis_ as a model system for the study of the virulence-associated type III secretion system of _Burkholderia pseudomallei_. Infect Immun. 2008;76: 5402-5411. Available at:  . 4. Lertpatanasuwan N, Sermsri K, Petkaseam A, Trakulsomboon S, Thamlikitkul V, Suputtamongkol Y: Arabinose-positive _Burkholderia pseudomallei_ infection in humans: case report. Clin Infect Dis. 1999;28: 927-928. 5. Glass MB, Gee JE, Steigerwalt AG, et al: Pneumonia and septicemia caused by _Burkholderia thailandensis_ in the United States. J Clin Microbiol. 2006;44: 4601-4604. Available at:  . 6. Amornchai P, Chierakul W, Wuthiekanun V, et al: Accuracy of _Burkholderia pseudomallei_ identification using the API 20NE system and a latex agglutination test. J Clin Microbiol. 2007;45: 3774-3776. Available at:  . 7. Zong Z, Wang X, Deng Y and Zhou T:P Misidentification of _Burkholderia pseudomallei_ as _Burkholderia cepacia_ by the VITEK 2 system. J Med Microbiol. 2012;61: 1483-1484. Available at:  . 8. Schroder G, Schuelein R, Quebatte M and Dehio C: Conjugative DNA transfer into human cells by the VirB/VirD4 type IV secretion system of the bacterial pathogen _Bartonella henselae_. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2011;108: 14643-14648. Available at:  . 9. Yu Y, Yang H, Li J, et al: Putative type VI secretion systems of _Vibrio parahaemolyticus_ contribute to adhesion to cultured cell monolayers. Arch Microbiol. 2012;194: 827-835. Abstract available at:  . 10. Price EP, Sarovich DS, Mayo M, et al: Within-host evolution of _Burkholderia pseudomallei_ over a twelve-year chronic carriage infection. MBio. 2013;4:e00388-13. Available at:  . [Authors: Chang K, Luo J, Huan Xu H, et al] -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail [As discussed in the papers below, _B. thailandensis_ has been considered a non-virulent relative of _B. pseudomallei_ but this report suggests that the organism can become more virulent leading to human mortality. As has been the case with _Elizabethkingia anophelis_ which caused an outbreak over the winter of 2015-2016 primarily in southeast Wisconsin in the USA which is quite difficult to distinguish from _E. meningoseptica_, _B. thailandensis_ is readily misidentified as _B. pseudomallei_ so the number of cases, especially in areas where melioidosis is classically endemic, may be undercounted. Kespichayawattana W, Intachote P, Utaisincharoen P, Sirisinha S: Virulent _Burkholderia pseudomallei_ is more efficient than avirulent _Burkholderia thailandensis_ in invasion of and adherence to cultured human epithelial cells. Microb Pathog. 2004;36: 287-292. Abstract -------- \"_Burkholderia pseudomallei_, a causative agent of melioidosis, is a facultative intracellular gram-negative bacillus that is closely related to its avirulent counterpart, _Burkholderia thailandensis_. However, pathogenic mechanisms and virulence factors of _B. pseudomallei_ remain elusive. In the present study, we compared the invasiveness, adherence, and replication of _B. pseudomallei_ and _B. thailandensis_ in human respiratory epithelial cells A549. Invasion was determined after 4 h of coculturing using antibiotic protection assay. Adherence was demonstrated by coculturing the cells with fluorescein-labeled bacteria for 1 h and the number of positive cells was analyzed by flow cytometry. The results obtained with this in vitro study demonstrated that compared with its avirulent counterpart, _B. pseudomallei_ is significantly more efficient (P .] [", "INFLUENZA: BATS AS POTENTIAL HOSTS OF HUMAN AND AVIAN INFLUENZA *************************************************************** A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Wed 28 Jun 2017 Source: Penn State News [edited] Bats, which make up about 1/3 of all mammalian species, play an important role in our ecosystem. They eat bugs that \"bug\" us, pollinate more than 500 species of plants, including banana and cacao, and distribute the seeds of many other plants. However, they also can carry diseases that are dangerous to humans, such as rabies. But they were never thought to host influenza viruses, until researchers studying pathogen diversity in bats in South and Central America identified 2 new influenza viruses in fruit bats. Subsequently, researchers in Africa found 30 percent of the bats they tested were infected with a flu virus, although these bats did not show any signs of illness. These discoveries led Suresh Kuchipudi, associate professor of virology in Penn State's College of Agricultural Sciences, to ask: \"Can bats be co-infected with avian and human influenza viruses? If so, can they act as carriers of influenza virus? Do they have the potential to contribute to the emergence of new pandemic influenza strains by mixing these 2 types of influenza viruses?\" To answer these questions, Kuchipudi brought together a multidisciplinary team to conduct research focusing on little brown bats, the most widely spread bat species in North America. \"Although bats are elusive creatures, there is increasing interface between them and humans as a result of wildlife trade, bush-meat hunting, deforestation and urban development,\" said Kuchipudi, who works in the college's Animal Diagnostic Laboratory. \"It's important to determine if bats can allow infection of avian and human flu viruses, and if they could then serve as 'mixing vessels' and perhaps create the next pandemic flu virus. Up until now, no one has ever studied influenza virus receptors in bats.\" Influenza infects a wide range of domestic and wild animals. Some are highly specific to one kind of host, but others can be passed between species. \"Swine flu\" and \"avian flu\" are examples of previous pandemics in humans caused by influenza viruses that came from animals. Avian flu viruses continue to cause huge economic losses to the poultry industry and can threaten public health if they gain the ability to cross over into humans. Co-existence with another kind of flu virus in some other species, such as a bat, could provide them the genetic material they need to jump species. \"The remarkable thing about influenza viruses is the ability to constantly change and evolve,\" Kuchipudi said. \"Influenza virus evolution involves mutations in the virus to gain the ability to transmit to a completely different host species.\" With assistance from the Pennsylvania Game Commission, Kuchipudi's research team screened 20 little brown bats -- 10 juvenile and 10 adult -- for the presence of influenza receptors using cutting-edge scientific methods involving lectin histochemistry, along with confocal and electron microscopy. The team tested for the presence of 2 specific receptors that are responsible for helping human and avian influenza viruses attach to cells. They further investigated whether avian and human flu viruses can bind to bat tissues. \"The study discovered that bats have the receptors in their respiratory and digestive tracts that are able to support binding of avian and human influenza viruses,\" said Ruth Nissly, research technician and manager of Kuchipudi's research lab. \"Having both receptors, as in the case of ducks and pigs, is believed to create conditions that enable the virus to mutate and create a new strain, which, in turn, could infect other animals, including humans.\" Despite these findings, Kuchipudi said there is not yet a need to worry about a \"bat flu.\" \"While the sum of the evidence suggests that bats could play an important role in influenza epidemiology and zoonotic influenza emergence, we do not have sufficient scientific understanding to adequately predict which influenza strains may cause the next pandemic or what hosts they may come from,\" he said. He cited the need for more research on how influenza may manifest itself in bats, as well as for additional surveillance of wild bats. Other Penn State researchers on the project were Shubhada Chothe, doctoral candidate in pathobiology, who carried out many of the experiments; Gitanjali Bhushan, undergraduate student in immunology and infectious disease; Yin-Ting Yeh, postdoctoral scholar in physics; Jenny Fisher, clinical assistant professor in veterinary and biomedical sciences; Mauricio Terrones, professor of physics, chemistry and materials science and engineering; and Bhushan M. Jayarao, professor of veterinary and biomedical sciences. The team also included Justin Brown, wildlife veterinarian with the Pennsylvania Game Commission and adjunct associate professor in veterinary and biomedical sciences; Gregory Turner, wildlife biologist, Pennsylvania Game Commission; Brent Sewall, assistant professor of biology, Temple University; and DeeAnn Reeder, presidential professor of biology, Bucknell University. The research, funded by Penn State's Veterinary and Biomedical Sciences Department, Eberly College of Science and the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service was published in April 2017 in Scientific Reports, an online, open access journal from the publishers of Nature. [Byline: Amy Duke] -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts [Influenza viruses can evolve by all known methods, including 'reassortment'. This is the ability of forming a chimera after a host cell has been infected by 2 different strains, i.e. a novel virus that is a mixture of the original viruses that co-infected the cell. This is why animals that can be infected by avian and human strains are of concern, because co-infection in them can produce a novel virus that has the ability of human-to-human transmission (as the original human virus) but greater pathogenicity (acquired from the avian virus). This is what was previously observed in swine, which are thought to have been the vessel for viral mixings that resulted in the 1918, 1957 and 1968 pandemic influenza viruses. The study shows that avian and human virus have the potential to infect bat cells, but further research is needed to assess the processes and patterns of the bat-virus interactions following exposure by avian and human influenza viruses. Are bats tolerant and become infected at high intensities? Do bats mount an immune response (resistance), and thus the infection is transient and viral shedding low? Are bats little tolerant and die soon after infected? The outcomes largely depend on the defense strategies bats have against influenza viruses, and would also determine the significance of bats for the epidemiology of influenza viruses of medical and veterinary importance. The scientific article referred to and entitled \"Avian and human influenza virus compatible sialic acid receptors in little brown bats\" can be accessed at Abstract: Influenza A viruses (IAVs) continue to threaten animal and human health globally. Bats are asymptomatic reservoirs for many zoonotic viruses. Recent reports of two novel IAVs in fruit bats and serological evidence of avian influenza virus (AIV) H9 infection in frugivorous bats raise questions about the role of bats in IAV epidemiology. IAVs bind to sialic acid (SA) receptors on host cells, and it is widely believed that hosts expressing both SA \u03b12,3-Gal and SA \u03b12,6-Gal receptors could facilitate genetic reassortment of avian and human IAVs. We found abundant co-expression of both avian (SA \u03b12,3-Gal) and human (SA \u03b12,6-Gal) type SA receptors in little brown bats (LBBs) that were compatible with avian and human IAV binding. This first ever study of IAV receptors in a bat species suggest that LBBs, a widely-distributed bat species in North America, could potentially be co-infected with avian and human IAVs, facilitating the emergence of zoonotic strains. - Mod.PMB] [", "TRICHINELLOSIS - UNITED STATES: (ALASKA) WALRUS MEAT **************************************************** A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Thu 6 Jul 2017 Source: Springer YP et al. Two Outbreaks of Trichinellosis Linked to Consumption of Walrus Meat -- Alaska. MMWR 2017;66(26): 692-6. [edited] During July 2016-May 2017, 2 outbreaks of trichinellosis (5 cases each) associated with consumption of raw or undercooked walrus meat occurred in Alaska. Walrus meat has been implicated in half of all trichinellosis cases reported in Alaska since 1975, yet the frequency of walrus-associated trichinellosis in the state has declined in recent years for unknown reasons. The 2 recent outbreaks were the 1st associated with consumption of walrus meat since 2002 and the 1st multiple-case outbreaks since 1992. Wild game consumption should be considered when evaluating suspected trichinellosis cases. Related public health messaging should be culturally sensitive to traditional methods of food handling and preparation. Corresponding author: Louisa Castrodale, Section of Epidemiology, Alaska Division of Public Health; 2Epidemic Intelligence Service, CDC Louisa.castrodale@alaska.gov References 1. Bailey TM and Schantz PM. Trends in the incidence and transmission patterns of trichinosis in humans in the United States: comparisons of the periods 1975-1981 and 1982-1986. Rev Infect Dis 1990;12:5-11. 2. Moorhead A, Grunenwald PE, Dietz VJ and Schantz PM. Trichinellosis in the United States, 1991-1996: declining but not gone. Am J Trop Med Hyg 1999;60:66-9. Available at:  . 3. Murrell KD and Pozio E. Trichinellosis: the zoonosis that won't go quietly. Int J Parasitol 2000;30:1339-49. Available at:  . 4. Wilson NO, Hall RL, Montgomery SP and Jones JL. Trichinellosis surveillance--United States, 2008-2012. MMWR Surveill Summ 2015;64(No. SS-1). Available at:  . 5. Gottstein B, Pozio E and N\u00f6ckler K. Epidemiology, diagnosis, treatment, and control of trichinellosis. Clin Microbiol Rev 2009;22:127-45. Available at:  . -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail [It is well known that Walrus has high infection rates with _Trichinella nativa_, being scavengers on carcasses floating in the water, which include sledge dogs, fox, seals and the occasional ice bear. Outbreaks has also been reported from Greenland (Moller LN et al. Outbreak of trichinellosis associated with consumption of game meat in West Greenland. Vet Parasitol. 2005;132:131-6). Seals are a common part of the food in the arctic and seals can be infected with _Trichinella nativa_ (Kapel CM et al. Experimental Trichinella infection in seals. Int J Parasitol. 2003;33:1463-70). - Mod.EP A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  .] [", "EQUINE INFECTIOUS ANEMIA - CANADA (03): (MANITOBA) COMMENT ********************************************************** A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Thu 6 Jul 2017 From: Carolyn James [edited] I am writing regarding article #http://promedmail.org/post/20170704.5150904 which was published on 2017-07-04. In the moderator comments, it was presumed that in Canada there are Equine Infectious Anemia (EIA) testing requirements for horses that are moved across provincial borders. In fact, there are no interprovincial testing requirements in place at this time. The CFIA is unable to impose testing requirements for domestic movements in the absence of declaring a primary control zone for EIA. This was a concept that was put forth by the CFIA in a 2015 discussion paper, as well as in a 2016 working group report. These documents were shared with the national equine industry organizations, the national veterinary association and the provinces. Currently, imposing and enforcing testing requirements for horses within Canada are industry responsibilities (e.g. event organizers and/or premises owners). When a positive EIA case is identified, the CFIA responds with disease intervention strategies to help control the spread of the EIA virus. -- Dr Carolyn James Veterinary Program Specialist Domestic Disease Control Section Animal Health Directorate Canadian Food Inspection Agency [I am very appreciative of Carolyn's correction. Very important. But it does indicate a weakness in the Canadian control system, that there are no interprovincial testing requirements when transporting horses. It is left up to the horse owners and event organizers, and the CFIA responds retrospectively. It goes a fair way to explaining the frequency of this disease in the Canadian prairies. Or put another way it is like depending on abstinence instead of contraception. - Mod.MHJ A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  .] [", "E. COLI EHEC - CANADA (10): O121, FLOUR **************************************** A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Thu 7 Jul 2017 Source: CDC. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 2017;66(26): 705-706 [edited] On 29 Dec 2016, PulseNet Canada identified a cluster of 6 _Escherichia coli_ non-O157 isolates with a matching pulsed-field gel electrophoresis (PFGE) pattern combination that was new to the PulseNet Canada database. The patients resided in 3 geographically distinct provinces. In January 2017, the Public Health Agency of Canada (PHAC) initiated an investigation with local, provincial, and federal partners to investigate the source of the outbreak. A case was defined as isolation of _E. coli_ non-O157 with the outbreak PFGE pattern or closely related by whole genome sequencing (WGS) in a Canadian resident or visitor with onset of symptoms of gastroenteritis on or after 1 Nov 2016. Patients' illness onset dates ranged from November 2016 to April 2017 [Figure - for figure, see original URL - Mod.LL]. As of 23 May 2017, a total of 29 cases were identified in 6 provinces (Alberta, British Columbia, Newfoundland and Labrador, Ontario, Quebec, and Saskatchewan). One additional case was identified in a U.S. resident who traveled to Canada during the exposure period. Patients' ages ranged from 2-79 years (median = 23.5 years) and 50 percent were female. Eight patients were hospitalized, and one developed hemolytic uremic syndrome. Clinical isolates were typed as _E. coli_ O121:H19 (one case was typed as _E. coli_ O121:H undetermined) with Shiga toxin 2-producing genes by in silico toxin testing and had closely related PFGE patterns and WGS. Initial investigation into the source of the outbreak did not identify any clear hypotheses; common exposures were ground beef, sausage style deli-meats, pizza, and pork, but the data did not converge on any specific products. Patients were reinterviewed by PHAC using an open-ended approach. Knowledge of a recent _E. coli_ O121 flour-associated outbreak prompted interviewers to ask about baking and exposure to raw flour or dough (1). Patients were also asked if any food items of interest, including flour, were available for testing. In March 2017, _E. coli_ O121 with the outbreak PFGE pattern was isolated from an open flour sample from a patient's home and a closed sample collected at a retail store, both of the same brand and production date. The clinical and flour isolates grouped together, with only 0-6 whole genome multilocus sequence typing allele differences. As a result of these findings, a product recall was issued. Based on possible connections to the recalled lot of flour, market sampling of flour within certain periods was initiated. The investigation led to additional recalls of flour and many secondary products (2). As of 23 May 2017, 22 patients had been asked about flour exposure in the 7 days before illness onset; 16 (73 percent) reported that the implicated brand of flour was used or probably used in the home during the exposure period. Comparison data on the expected proportion with exposure to this brand of flour were not available. Up to 11 of these 16 patients reported they ate or probably ate raw dough during their exposure period. This is the 1st national outbreak of non-O157 Shiga toxin-producing _E. coli_ infections identified in Canada and the 1st Canadian outbreak linked to flour. An open-ended interview approach and flour sampling were used to implicate flour as the source. Because of the recent emergence of _E. coli_ outbreaks linked to flour, public health professionals should consider flour as a possible source in _E. coli_ outbreaks and communicate the risk associated with exposure to flour, raw batter, and dough in public health messaging. References ---------- 1. CDC: Multistate outbreak of Shiga toxin-producing Escherichia coli infections linked to flour (Final Update). Atlanta, GA: US Department of Health and Human Services, CDC; 2016. 2. Canadian Food Inspection Agency: Canadian Food Inspection Agency's (CFIA) investigation into E. coli O121 in flour and flour products. Mississauga, Canada: Canadian Food Inspection Agency; 2017. [Authors: Morton V, Cheng JM, Sharma D, Kearney A] -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail [As reported by Canadian authorities, Isolates from the 2016 US O121 outbreak have been compared to the outbreak in Canada by whole genome sequencing (via PulseNet International); the Canadian outbreak strain was not similar to the US outbreak. As a reminder, other non-O157 _E. coli_ serogroups that have been associated with EHEC disease include motile ones such as O26:H11 and O104:H21 and non-motile ones such as O111:NM (or H-). Such non-O157 isolates can be obtained from sheep and cattle, and although they cause as many as 30 percent of outbreaks of EHEC (1), they appear to be somewhat less (or at least more variably) virulent in a variety of in vivo and in vitro assays (2-4). In analyzing the genetic and phenotypic profiles of non-O157 groups, it has been found that they belong to their own lineages and have unique profiles of virulence traits different from O157 (5). The serogroups appearing to be most prominent are O26, O111, O128, and O103 (6). References: 1. Hussain HS, Omaye ST. Introduction to the food safety concerns of verotoxin-producing _Escherichia coli_. Exp Biol Med. 2003; 228: 331-2. 2. Blanco J, Blanco M, Blanco JE, et al. Verotoxin-producing _Escherichia coli_ in Spain: prevalence, serotypes, and virulence genes of O157:H7 and non-O157 VTEC in ruminants, raw beef products, and humans. Exp Biol Med. 2003; 228: 345-51. 3. Law D, Kelly J. Use of heme and hemoglobin by _Escherichia coli_ O157 and other Shiga-toxin-producing _E. coli_ serogroups. Infect Immun. 1995; 63: 700-2. 4. Tzipori S, Wachsmuth KI, Smithers J, Jackson C. Studies in gnotobiotic piglets on non-O157:H7 _Escherichia coli_ serotypes isolated from patients with hemorrhagic colitis. Gastroenterology 1988; 94: 590-7. 5. Schmidt H, Geitz C, Tarr PI, et al. Non-O157:H7 pathogenic Shiga-toxin producing _Escherichia coli_: phenotypic and genetic profiling of virulence traits and evidence for clonality. J Infect Dis. 1999; 179: 115-23. 6. Bettelheim KA. Role of non-O157 VTEC. Symp Ser Soc Appl Microbiol. 2000; (29): 38-50S. - Mod.LL A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  .] [", "LEGIONELLOSIS - EUROPE (02): ex UNITED ARAB EMIRATES (DUBAI) ************************************************************ A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Tue 4 Jul 2017 Source: Khaleej Times [edited] Travellers have been issued a Legionnaires' disease warning after an Irish person contracted the disease on a recent visit to Dubai, international news reports said. The reports published last week [week of 25 Jun - 1 Jul 2017] said that though risk of contracting the disease is low, it may be increased for those aged over 50, those with underlying breathing problems or weakened immune systems and smokers. Most of those who contracted the disease stayed in hotels or apartments in Dubai, some as recently as late May [2017], they said. Since last October [2016], 65 cases of the disease originating in Dubai have been reported to the European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control, one of them by Ireland, said the Irish Times. The government of UK also updated its travel advisory but said that the overall risk of Legionnaires' disease for UK travellers to Dubai is low except for persons with established risk factors for Legionnaires' disease [ ]. The paper said that as the source of the outbreak had not been identified, anyone visiting or living in Dubai could still be at risk of exposure to the _Legionella_ bacteria. Local health authorities could not be reached for comments. Till the end of last year [2016], the European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control reported 44 cases in travellers. Cases were reported by the United Kingdom (20 cases), Sweden (6), the Netherlands (5), France (3), Denmark (3), Germany (3), Austria (1), Belgium (1), Hungary (1) and Switzerland (1). Nine of 44 cases (20 percent) spent time in another location in UAE or in a country other than their home country during their incubation period. One of the notified cases is reported as a fatal case. All cases are laboratory confirmed, reported ECDPC. As per ECDPC, UAE authorities have informed that there was no increase observed in notifiable pneumonia cases in Dubai during the period October to December 2016 when these cases were observed. Public health authorities in the UAE also said that environmental investigations were undertaken at the notified hotels and _Legionella_ count results within the Dubai Municipality showed acceptable levels for water systems. In 2011, a top hotel in Dubai faced a lawsuit after 2 guests claimed that they had contracted the disease while staying on the property. The Dubai Health Authority (DHA) had then also formed a committee to probe the outbreak. If travellers develop symptoms within 2 weeks of returning home, they should seek medical care and inform the healthcare provider of the travel history. [Byline: Asma Ali Zain] -- Communicated by: Denis Green [ProMED-mail thanks Denis Green for his continued contributions. ProMED-mail previously reported on this outbreak when there were 60 cases among European travelers who developed legionnaires' disease within 2 weeks of returning home from Dubai (see ProMED-mail post Legionellosis - Europe: ex United Arab Emirates (Dubai) http://promedmail.org/post/20170602.5079438). No source of the outbreak has been identified. Dubai is one of the 7 emirates and the most populous city of the United Arab Emirates (UAE) ( ). Dubai has been ruled by the Al Maktoum dynasty since 1833. Dubai can be located on the HealthMap/ProMED-mail interactive map at  . - Mod.ML A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  .] [", "POLIOMYELITIS UPDATE (16): PAKISTAN (BALOCHISTAN), GLOBAL ********************************************************* A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases In this update: [1] Pakistan - Balochistan, media report [2] Pakistan - Balochistan, EpiCore Surveillance Project [3] Global - GPEI ****** [1] Pakistan - Balochistan, media report Date: Thu 6 Jul 2017 Source: Dawn [edited] A polio case has been detected in Chaman, a town along the Pak-Afghan border in Qila Abdullah district. In 2016, 20 cases were reported from across the country out of which 2 were from Qila Abdullah. The 18-month-old son of a resident of Mohalla Rah Mohammad in Mehmoodabad, was diagnosed with the poliovirus on [Mon 3 Jul 2017] in what is being termed by the health officials as the 1st case reported in Balochistan this year [2017]. On [Wed 5 Jul 2017], the health department claimed that the child's mother and grandmother had refused to get him vaccinated. They said the boy had hardly received 2 to 3 doses of the vaccine since he was born. The child's father said that they got alarmed when [the boy] was running a high fever and was constipated. He was taken to a local dispensary and later to the children's hospital in the area, where doctors suspected the child was suffering from the crippling disease. Health officials said that after the child's stool samples were taken and other medical tests were carried out, it was confirmed that he was suffering from polio. The next polio eradication campaign in the province is scheduled for [24 Jul 2017]. -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail (Alerted to case by HealthMap Alert) [The media report suggests that the stool specimens were positive for poliovirus but does not mention the genetic typing whether the virus is a wild poliovirus (WPV) or a vaccine derived poliovirus (VDPV). [According to the EpiCore report below it is WPV1 - Mod.LM] The below weekly report from the Global Polio Eradication Initiative (GPEI) does not mention the above case, suggesting the genetic typing of the virus was most likely still pending at the time of the report. It should be noted that this case comes from a town by the Pakistan/Afghanistan border, a region that has been identified as high risk for poliovirus transmission, where there have been periodic positive environmental samples. Using the drafted version of this post, I sent an RFI out to the EpiCore Surveillance Project members and received responses with the information I had requested. See below. The media report does mention the family withheld vaccination from the child that had possibly received less than 3 doses - a pity. This part of Pakistan is one of the areas with high resistance to vaccination and where there has been periodic violence directed towards vaccination workers. [The EpiCore report below supports that vaccine refusal was involved in this case. - Mod.LM] A map showing the location of Chaman town near the Afghan border can be found at  . The HealthMap/ProMED map of Pakistan can be found at:  . - Mod.MPP] ****** [2] Pakistan - Balochistan, EpiCore Surveillance Project Date: 6 Jul 2017 Source: EpiCore Surveillance Project [a] The NIH Islamabad has confirmed the virus as a WPV1 Responding Member: Zulfiqar Ali PEI- WHO Sindh -- [b] This is the 3rd case in Pakistan this year (2017) and the 1st case from the Quetta block. The child is from a refusal family. The mother hides the child as per the grandfather's pressure. It is from a district Killah Abdullah in the same UC [Union Council] which reported a last case in 2016. Responding Member: Dr. Muhammad Hakim FELTP Pakistan -- Communicated by: EpiCore Surveillance Project Members [Our thanks goes out to the EpiCore Surveillance Project members Drs. Zulficar Ali and Muhammad Hakim for their rapid replies to our RFI for more information on the laboratory findings on this case. As this case had a WPV1 isolated, genetic testing on the isolate might assist in identifying where this virus was last identified. - Mod.MPP] ****** [3] Global - GPEI Date: Thu 6 Jul 2017 Source: Global Polio Eradication Initiative [edited] Poliovirus Weekly Update 5-Jul-2017, World Health Organization New wild poliovirus cases reported this week: 0 Total number of wild poliovirus cases in 2017: 6 Total number of wild poliovirus cases in 2016: 37 New cVDPV cases reported this week: 2 Total number of cVDPV cases in 2017: 28 Total number of cVDPV cases in 2016: 5 Headlines - On [1 Jul 2017], Dr Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus began his 5-year term as the World Health Organization's (WHO) new Director-General. In his introductory speech to WHO staff, he emphasised his commitment to seeing the last case of polio during his tenure. - The GPEI offers sincere thanks to polio eradication pioneer and leader Dr Margaret Chan, who has retired from her role as Director-General of WHO. - The Korea Foundation for International Healthcare is supporting efforts to improve surveillance in one of the last remaining strongholds of the poliovirus. - Ambassador Carole Lanteri, of the Permanent Mission of Monaco, handed over to Ambassador/Deputy Permanent Representative Mitsuko Shino, of the Permanent Mission of Japan, as co-chair of the Polio Partners Group in June [2017]. - Summary of newly-reported viruses this week: Pakistan - 2 new wild poliovirus type 1 (WPV1) positive environmental samples. Syria - 2 new circulating vaccine-derived type 2 polioviruses (cVDPV2) isolated from acute flaccid paralysis (AFP) cases and 6 new cVDPV2s isolated from contacts. See country-specific section below, for more details. Afghanistan - No new wild poliovirus type 1 (WPV1) cases were reported in the past week. The total number of WPV1 cases for 2017 remains 4. The most recent WPV1 case had onset of paralysis on [16 Apr 2017] from Nawzad district, Hilmand province. - With most of Afghanistan polio-free, efforts are focused on continuing to strengthen operations, in close coordination with Pakistan, to address remaining low-level transmission in the common reservoir area of the Quetta-Kandahar transmission corridor. - Afghanistan is carrying out a programme review focusing on the implementation of the National Emergency Action Plan and making necessary adjustments for the 2nd half of 2017. Pakistan - No new wild poliovirus type 1 (WPV1) cases were reported in the past week. The total number of WPV1 cases for 2017 remains 2. The most recent case had onset of paralysis on [13 Feb 2017], from Diamir district, Gilgit Baltistan. - A total of 2 new WPV1-positive environmental samples were reported in the past week, from Peshawar district of Khyber Pakhtunkhwa and from Rawalpindi district of Punjab, both with collection date [10 Jun 2017]. - The year 2016 saw the lowest ever annual number of polio cases in the country but poliovirus continues to be isolated through environmental surveillance over a significant geographical range. Efforts are ongoing through implementation of the national emergency action plan to address remaining gaps in coverage and surveillance, in close coordination with neighbouring Afghanistan. Nigeria - No new cases of wild poliovirus type 1 (WPV1) were reported in the past week. The total number of WPV1 cases for 2016 remains 4 and no cases have been reported in 2017. The most recent case had onset of paralysis on [21 Aug 2016] in Monguno Local Government Area (LGA), Borno. - Nigeria continues to implement emergency response to the detected WPV1 strain and circulating vaccine-derived poliovirus type 2 (cVDPV2) strains affecting the country. - The response is part of a broader regional outbreak response, coordinated with neighbouring countries, in particular the Lake Chad sub-region, including northern Cameroon, parts of Central African Republic, Chad and southern Niger. - Detection of the polio cases in Nigeria underscores the risk posed by low-level undetected transmission and the urgent need to strengthen subnational surveillance. Lake Chad Basin - The detection of wild poliovirus type 1 (WPV1) and circulating vaccine-derived poliovirus type 2 (cVDPV2) in Nigeria poses a risk to the neighbouring countries of the Lake Chad basin and hence an outbreak response plan is being implemented as part of the response to the Nigeria outbreak. - Emergency outbreak response efforts continue across the Lake Chad basin, together with activities to fill subnational surveillance gaps across the region. Central Africa - No new cases were reported in the past week. The Democratic Republic of the Congo (DR Congo) is affected by 2 separate outbreaks of circulating vaccine derived poliovirus type 2 (cVDPV2), in Haut Lomami province (2 cases, with onset of paralysis on [8 Mar 2017 and 20 Feb 2017]); and in Maniema province (2 cases with onset of paralysis on [26 Mar 2017 and 18 Apr 2017], with an additional isolate detected in a healthy individual with sample collection on [2 May 2017]). - Outbreak response plans are currently being finalised, with supplementary immunization activities using monovalent oral polio vaccine type 2 (mOPV2) in line with internationally-agreed outbreak response protocols. - The 1st mOPV2 campaign was implemented last week ([27-29 Jun 2017]) targeting more than 750 000 children under the age of 5 years in the 2 affected provinces. - Surveillance and immunization activities are being strengthened in neighbouring countries. - DR Congo is also affected by an Ebola outbreak, in Bas Uele province in the north of the country. Coordination among both outbreak response teams will be necessary and teams are already working on this. [WHO has announced the outbreak of Ebola has ended (see  . - Mod.MPP] Syrian Arab Republic - In Syria, 2 new cases of circulating vaccine-derived poliovirus type 2 (cVDPV2) were reported in the past week, bringing the total of cVDPV2 cases to 24. All cases had onset of paralysis between [3 Mar 2017 and 28 May 2017]. A total of 22 of the cases are from Mayadeen district, Deir-Al-Zour governorate, and 2 cases are from Raqua and Talabyad districts, Raqua governorate. Additionally, 6 cVDPV2s were also isolated from contacts, all from Mayadeen district (collected in May and June [2017]). - Confirmation of these latest cases is not unexpected at this time and does not change the operational situation, as outbreak response plans are being finalized, in line with internationally-agreed outbreak response protocols. Although access to Deir-Al-Zour is compromised due to insecurity, the Governorate has been partially reached by several vaccination campaigns against polio and other vaccine-preventable diseases since the beginning of 2016. Most recently, 2 campaigns have been conducted in March and April 2017 using the bivalent oral polio vaccine ([bOPV]). However, only limited coverage was possible through these campaigns. In response to the isolation of cVDPV2 from Raqua governorate, the Syrian Ministry of Health in collaboration with WHO and UNICEF is considering adding the area to the outbreak response. This is under discussion due to ongoing military operations. Officially reported wild poliovirus cases as of 4 Jul 2017 Total global cases in 2017: 6 (compared with 19 for the same period in 2016) - Total in endemic countries in 2017: 6 (compared with 19 for the same period in 2016) - Total in non-endemic countries in 2017: 0 (compared with 0 for the same period in 2016) - Afghanistan: 4 cases in 2017 (compared with 6 for the same period in 2016), onset of paralysis of most recent case: 16 Apr 2017 - Pakistan: 2 cases in 2017 (compared with 13 for the same period in 2016), onset of paralysis of most recent case: 13 Feb 2017 - Nigeria: 0 case in 2017 (compared with 0 for the same period in 2016), onset of paralysis of most recent case: 21 Aug 2016 Total global cases in 2016: 37 - Total in endemic countries: 37 - Total in non-endemic countries: 0 Officially reported cVDPV cases as of 4 Jul 2017 Total global cases in 2017: 28 (compared with 3 for the same period in 2016) - Syrian Arab Republic: 24 cases in 2017 (compared with 0 for the same period in 2016), onset of paralysis of most recent case: 28 May 2017 - Democratic Republic of the Congo: 4 cases in 2017 (compared with 0 for the same period in 2016), onset of paralysis of most recent case: 18 Apr 2017 - Pakistan: 0 case in 2017 (compared with 0 for the same period in 2016), onset of paralysis of most recent case: 17 Dec 2016 - Nigeria: 0 case in 2017 (compared with 0 for the same period in 2016), onset of paralysis of most recent case: 28 Oct 2016 - Lao People's Democratic Republic: 0 case in 2017 (compared with 3 for the same period in 2016), onset of paralysis of most recent case: 11 Jan 2016 Total global cases in 2016: 5 - Total in endemic countries: 2 - Total in non-endemic countries: 3 -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail [Note that the case mentioned in the media report in section [1] above is not reflected in this weekly GPEI update. As the local media in Pakistan has been good at reporting on positive polio cases (and not necessarily as yet unconfirmed cases of AFP - acute flaccid paralysis), we suspect that this case will appear in future weekly GPEI updates. As mentioned in previous posts related to the ongoing outbreak of cVDPV2 associated polio in Syria, there were a total of 65 identified cases of AFP in the affected region of whom 22 had been ruled out (not due to poliovirus). With the above confirmation of 2 new cases there have now been 24 confirmed cases of paralytic poliomyelitis attributable to the cVDPV2. There are also an addition 6 individual who were tested as part of contact tracing that were found to have asymptomatic cVDPV infections. The above report from the GPEI confirms the media report from yesterday's ProMED-mail report on a 2nd case in Raqqah, confirming that the cVDPV2 responsible for this outbreak is now circulating in Raqqah governorate. The WHO/GPEI map showing the locations of all confirmed cases of poliomyelitis in 2017 (and linkable to 2016) can be found at:  . For a map of Syria showing provinces, see  . Deir Al Zour is referred to as Dayr az Zawr in this map. The HealthMap/ProMED map of Syria can be found at  . - Mod.MPP] [", "ASIAN GREENING, CITRUS - PANAMA: FIRST REPORT (BOCAS DEL TORO) ************************************************************** A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: June 2017 Source: European Plant Protection Organization (EPPO) Reporting Service 6/2017/117 [edited] In February 2016, '_Candidatus_ Liberibacter asiaticus' (associated with huanglongbing - EPPO A1 List) was detected for the 1st time in Panama. The disease was found on citrus [in] areas of province of Bocas del Toro. The Ministry of Agriculture has declared a state of phytosanitary emergency and a national contingency plan has been elaborated to contain the disease and its vector, _Diaphorina citri_ (Hemiptera: Liviidae - EPPO A1 List). In July 2016, 101 citrus plants at the sites where the disease was found were burnt. In addition to plant destruction and surveys, the development of a national certification scheme for the production of healthy planting material of citrus has been undertaken. -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail [Greening is one of the most damaging diseases of citrus crops affecting leaves and fruit. It is caused by fastidious phloem-inhabiting bacteria classified as _Candidatus_ Liberibacter asiaticus (Asian greening; huanglongbing, HLB), africanus (including a subsp. capensis; African greening), or americanus (South American greening). The pathogens can only be distinguished by molecular methods. Symptoms include blotchy mottling and yellowing of leaves, as well as small, irregularly shaped fruits with a thick, pale peel and bad taste. Early symptoms may be confused with nutrient deficiencies. Affected trees become stunted, bear multiple off-season flowers, and may live for only a few years without ever bearing usable fruit. The diseases are restricted to _Citrus_ and close relatives because of the narrow host range of their psyllid vectors. _Ca._ L. asiaticus and americanus are spread by the Asian citrus psyllid (_Diaphorina citri_). The main vector for _Ca._ L. africanus is the African citrus psyllid _Trioza erytreae_. The pathogens can also be spread by grafting and possibly by seed from infected plants or transovarially in the vectors. Both pathogens and vectors can be spread with plant material. Disease management requires an integrated approach including use of clean planting and grafting stock, elimination of inoculum, use of pesticides for vector control in orchards, and biological control of vectors in non-crop reservoirs. Alternative management approaches, such as detection of infected trees by sniffer dogs and cultural control by interplanting with non-host crops, are being trialed. In areas where a pathogen has not yet been detected, biological control of vectors has been used successfully to reduce insect numbers and, therefore, the risk of greening outbreaks (for example, see ProMED-mail post http://promedmail.org/post/20090601.2034). In the neighboring Caribbean region, HLB has also recently been reported for the 1st time from Trinidad and Tobago (ProMED-mail post http://promedmail.org/post/20170614.5104395). Maps Panama (with provinces): Central America, overview: Pictures Asian greening (HLB) symptoms: Asian and African greening, symptoms and vector photo galleries:  and _Ca._ L. asiaticus in host phloem, microscopy: _D. citri_: Links Citrus greening information:  , and Asian greening, information and distribution: African greening, information and distribution: Taxonomy of Liberibacter species via: Taxonomy and information for psyllid vectors (with pictures) via:  and  . - Mod.DHA A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  .] [", "VIBRIO VULNIFICUS - USA (05): (ALABAMA) *************************************** A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Thu 6 Jul 2017 4:43 PM EDT Source: WALA [edited] Barbara Gibbs with The Alabama Department of Health has confirmed 3 cases of flesh eating bacteria (_Vibrio vulnificus_) in Mobile County. Gibbs, who oversees the Infectious Disease and Control Department, said one case was from an individual who consumed raw oysters in another state and the other 2 cases were due to exposure to open wounds in area waters. Officials say the latter 2 cases happened during the month of June [2017]; one in the Mississippi Sound and the other was on Dauphin Island. They say all 3 cases are \"mild cases.\" Earlier this week [week of 2-8 Jul 2017], the Gulf Coast News Today reported a 70-year-old Mississippi woman started getting symptoms after fishing off the Fairhope Pier [in Fairhope, AL). In the case of the unidentified Mississippi woman, we're told she reached into the bait bucket, where a live shrimp pricked her. After returning home to Mississippi, her hand began to swell and she got a fever, chills, and headaches. We are told she was rushed to Forrest General Hospital in Hattiesburg, where she had several surgeries. \"This is not a common occurrence, and for that we are very grateful,\" said Dr Karen Landers with the Alabama Department of Public Health. \"I think there are about 1000 cases a year reported in the USA. It's not common, but when people have it, it's pretty severe.\" Dr Landers says they are working with Mississippi health officials to investigate this case further. It is unclear right now whether the bacteria came from the water directly, or from the shrimp that pricked the woman's hand. [Byline: Cassandra McAboy, Alexa Knowles, Devan Coffaro] -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail [The following is extracted from the \"Bad Bug Book,\" Center for Safety and Applied Nutrition, US FDA (Food and Drug Administration) at  : _Vibrio vulnificus_, a lactose-fermenting, halophilic, Gram-negative, opportunistic pathogen, is found in estuarine environments and associated with various marine species such as plankton, shellfish (oysters, clams, and crabs), and finfish. Environmental factors responsible for controlling numbers of _V. vulnificus_ in seafood and in the environment include temperature, pH, salinity, and amounts of dissolved organics. It may be normal flora in salt water, and acquiring this organism from shellfish or water exposure does not imply that the water is contaminated by sewage. Wound infections result either from contaminating an open wound with sea water harboring the organism, or by lacerating part of the body on coral, fish, etc., followed by contamination with the organism. The ingestion of _V. vulnificus_ by healthy individuals can result in gastroenteritis. The \"primary septicemia\" form of the disease follows consumption of raw seafood containing the organism by individuals with underlying chronic disease, particularly liver disease. The organism can also enter through damaged skin. In these individuals, the microorganism enters the blood stream, resulting in septic shock, rapidly followed by death in many cases (about 50 percent). Over 70 percent of infected individuals have distinctive bullous skin lesions (shown at  ). There are 2 points to be emphasized: that vibrios are normal flora in warm saltwater (not indicative of any sewage contamination) and that most of the life-threatening illnesses occur in individuals with underlying medical illnesses, including immunocompromised states, chronic liver disease, and diabetes. So-called normal individuals often just get gastroenteritis. The range of disease due to _V. vulnificus_ can involve more northern geographical areas if the area is affected by a substantial heat wave. - Mod.LL A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  .] [", "RABIES (28): AMERICAS, USA (OREGON), BAT, HUMAN EXPOSURE ******************************************************** A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Thu 7 Jul 2017 Source: Katu2 [edited] A Benton County resident was bitten by a bat that tested positive for rabies, health officials from the State of Oregon and the Benton County Health Department confirmed [Wed 5 Jul 2017]. On [Mon 3 Jul 2017], Benton County Environmental Health learned a resident was bitten by a bat on [Sun 2 Jul 2017]. According to Benton County, the resident noticed the bat behaving unusually on the front port of his or her residence before the person was bitten. Oregon state Veterinary Diagnostic laboratory in Corvallis said the bat tested positive for rabies. This is the 1st bat that's tested positive for rabies in Benton County in 2017. \"Bats are the primary reservoir of rabies in Oregon,\" said Robert Baker of Benton County Environmental Health. The person with the bite is being treated for the rabies exposure. Baker said if a bat bites someone, that person should attempted to safely capture the bat without destroying its head. That way officials can test the bat for rabies. -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts [For information on wildlife reservoirs of rabies in the USA, go to  . Genetic evidence suggests that rabies is an old disease for bats in the New World. Bats from most of the bat species in North America, when sampled in sufficient numbers, have been found to be infected with rabies virus. Rabies viruses recovered from bats were shown to be distinct from rabies viruses recovered from terrestrial mammals, suggesting that these viruses evolved within their bat hosts. Bat rabies viruses of bats are genetically diverse, exhibiting mutations characteristic to each host bat species. It should be taken into account, however, that bat rabies can be transmitted to humans and their domestic animals, since infections are almost always fatal, unless treated prophylactically. - Mod.PMB A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  .] [", "TICK PARALYSIS, CANINE - USA (03): (COLORADO) CORRECTION ******************************************************** A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases [1] Date: Thu 6 Jul 2017 From: Lennox Applewhaite [edited] The last line of paragraph 2 is not quite correct. Female ticks secrete a toxin that attacks the motor neurons leading to the paralysis discussed. But male ticks do take blood meals. Both sexes attack men and animals and both are haematophagous. -- Lennox Applewhaite, Veterinarian ****** [2] Date: Fri 7 Jul 2017 From: Charles H Calisher [edited] Lennox Applewhaite is quite right, I was wrong. Male ticks do take blood meals. -- Charlie Calisher [My fault as Moderator. I should have caught it. And I worked with _Amblyoma variegatum_ in Guadeloupe in the mid-80s, counting the buggers on cattle peritoneums; a quick and easy method in the field. Anno domini I fear. - Mod.MHJ A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  .] [", "AVIAN INFLUENZA (121): BELGIUM (LIEGE), CAPTIVE BIRDS, HPAI H5N8, SPREAD ************************************************************************ A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Wed 5 Jul 2017 Source: Lavenir.net [in French, trans. Corr.SB, edited] A new infection by the pathogenic H5N8 avian influenza virus has been observed in an amateur breeding establishment in Bassenge (province of Li\u00e8ge), the Federal Agency for the safety of the food chain (Afsca) announced on [Wed 5 Jul 2017]. So far, a total of 13 confirmed \"infection\" locations have been detected. A temporary buffer zone of a radius of 3 km [approx. 1.8 mi] has been delineated to include the communes of Li\u00e8ge in Bassenge, Oupeye, Vis\u00e9 and Limburg in Riemst. In the buffer zone, movements of poultry, other birds and hatching eggs are prohibited. Each holder of birds and poultry must feed and water his poultry indoors and send to his burgomaster, within 48 hours, a species inventory of the number of animals present. The order will be in place for at least 3 weeks, says Afsca. Throughout Belgium, professional and amateur poultry holders, in areas where wild birds are numerous, must feed and water their birds indoors at all times. Afsca calls for vigilance. If a bird is sick or dies suddenly, a veterinarian should immediately be called. The agency makes a call that meat and poultry eggs can be safely consumed. Willy Borsus, Federal Minister of Agriculture, said that \"for now, professional breeders are not affected. I insist once again to ask for vigilance from all. \" -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts [The official press release of Belgium's Afsca addressing the new, 13th HPAI H5N8 outbreak in an \"amateur breeding establishment\" is available (in French and Dutch) at  . Its notification to the OIE is anticipated. Belgium's notifications to the OIE on the HPAI H5N8 events have been submitted in 2 threads: 1. The events on \"hobbyist holdings\" were notified as affecting \"non-poultry including wild birds\" (the thread, with map and links to the follow-up reports, is available at  ); 2. The (2) events on premises of \"bird dealers of different species\" were considered as outbreaks in \"poultry\" (the thread, with map and links to the follow-up reports, is available at  ). On [Tue 27 Jun 2017], Afsca published the following, most recent update of its background information (in English) on the event (available at ): \"A few cases of Highly Pathogenic Avian Influenza [HPAI], type H5N8, were detected in Belgium in February and March 2017 in wild birds and in hobbyist holdings of captive birds. \"HPAI H5N8 has been isolated again in June [2017] in Belgian amateur holdings of captive birds and moreover in 2 facilities of bird dealers of different species, identified as epidemiological links with the last hobbyists cases. The 2 bird merchants are only dealing with amateur, non-professional, owners (hobbyists). \"Measures --------- \"A Restriction zone [RZ] of 3 km [approx. 1.8 mi] has been determined around the infected hobby holdings. Euthanasia and destruction of the remaining birds and their products will be performed, and samples taken and sent to the official laboratory (CODA-CERVA). Furthermore, a Protection Zone (PZ) of 3 km [approx. 1.8 mi] and a Surveillance Zone [SZ] of 10 km [approx. 6.2 mi] has been determined around the holdings of the bird merchants. The maps are available on the following page  . \"Inside the RZ, PZ and SZ, the following measures have been put in force: - Confinement of all birds within the PZ around Oostkamp (the merchant outbreak); - Prohibition of movements of poultry, captive birds and eggs; - Prohibition to give feed and water to all birds (including captive birds) outside the building; - Inventory of all birds kept inside the restriction zone and communication of the inventories to the mayors of the towns within 72 hours. \"On a national level, the following measures starting on [15 Jun 2017], are still [27 Jun 2017] in force: - Prohibition of poultry and captive bird markets; - Prohibition of poultry gathering events (fairs, ...).\" The media report at the source URL includes a map showing the 13 outbreaks. - Mod.AS A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  .] [", "AMEBIC MENINGOENCEPHALITIS, PRIMARY - PAKISTAN (03): SINDH, FATAL ***************************************************************** A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Wed 5 Jul 2017 Source: The News International [edited] _Naegleria fowleri_, the brain-eating amoeba, has claimed another life in Karachi: a young man of around 29 years of age who died due to infection caused by the deadly microorganism at a private hospital on [Wed 28 Jun 2017], the Sindh Health Department disclosed on [Tue 4 Jul 2017]. \"AA, a teacher by profession and a resident of KDA Scheme No 1 in Karachi, was admitted to the Aga Khan University Hospital (AKUH) on [Sun 25 Jun 2017],\" said Dr Zafar Mehdi, the focal person for the _N. fowleri_ monitoring committee of the health department. \"He was diagnosed with meningitis caused by _Naegleria fowleri_. He died on [Wed 28 Jun 2017] at the AKUH due to the deadly infection.\" This is the year's [2017] 3rd death in the province and 2nd in Karachi. A man had died due to infection caused by _N. fowleri_ in Karachi on Eidul Fitr, while a young man had earlier died at a private hospital after being infected by the deadly microorganism in the Tando Allahyar district of the province. Dr Mehdi said AA was taken to the AKUH on [Sun 25 Jun 2017] after he fell unconscious during the holy month of Ramazan. He died at the hospital on [28 Jun 2017]. Ruling out the possibility of swimming, he said the patient had spent 4 separate nights of Ramazan at a lawn for prayers. The doctor suspected that he might have contracted the infection during ablution before the prayers. The previous Karachi victim of _N. fowleri_, 55-year-old ST, had also contracted the deadly infection during Ramazan, as he used to make ablution before the prayers at a local mosque in the Gulberg locality. Dr Mehdi said the lack of chlorination by the Karachi Water & Sewerage Board was resulting in the growth of the amoeba in the water being supplied to the city. He urged the people to use sodium hypochlorite or common bleach to disinfect the water in their tanks. \"People should use common bleach to disinfect the water in their overhead and underground tanks. It contains chlorine that kills all the microorganisms in the water.\" Experts at the AKUH claimed that large colonies of _N. fowleri_ were now present in the overhead and underground water tanks at houses, mosques and apartment buildings, where the microorganism was living in the layer of mud. They said that whenever the brain-eating amoeba found suitable environmental conditions and temperatures, it multiplied and infected the people who ingested the water through their nostrils. \"Our research has shown that _Naegleria fowleri_ colonies are present in the water tanks that were not cleaned for months and years,\" said an AKUH expert and researcher. \"These microorganisms live in the layer of mud at the bottom of the water tanks, and when they find suitable environmental conditions, they start multiplying and targeting humans.\" The researcher said the best option to stay safe from _N. fowleri_ was to clean the overhead and underground tanks at houses, mosques and apartment buildings, and then to regularly chlorinate the water to kill the microorganisms. \"The water tanks at mosques should be cleaned on priority basis, as they are hardly cleaned and taken care of by the management of the mosques.\" He said a large number of people made ablution on a daily basis at mosques and ingested the water through their nostrils, which could infect them with the amoeba. Experts told The News that the best chemical available for disinfecting water was sodium hypochlorite, which was available in the market. They said common bleach could also be used for killing germs, bacteria and other deadly pathogens in the water because it also contained chlorine. [Byline: M Waqar Bhatti] -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail [This report provides further information on cases reportred an earlier published post by Mod. EP: Amebic meningoencephalitis, primary - Pakistan (02): (SD) fatal http://promedmail.org/post/20170704.5150504. As mentioned in the report, evaluation and monitoring of water samples from multiple locations and presence of parasite _N. fowleri_ should be followed up by the health authorities and relevant communication messages must be conveyed to the general public. Furthermore, measures may be evaluated to minimize or eliminate the propagation of the parasite in the current warm and humid weather. - Mod.UBA A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  .] [", "ANTHRAX - UKRAINE: (SUMY) PORCINE, OIE ************************************** A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Fri 7 Jul 2017 Source: OIE, WAHID (World Animal Health Information Database), weekly disease information 2017; 30(28) [edited] Anthrax, Ukraine ---------------- Information received on [and dated] 7 Jul 2017 from Dr Andrii Zhuk, First Deputy Head of the State Service of Ukraine on Food Safety and Consumer production, International Cooperation of the State Service of Ukraine on Food Safety and Consumer Protection, UKR Ministry of Agrarian Policy and Food, KIEV, Ukraine Summary: Report type: Immediate notification Date of start of the event: 27 Jun 2017 Date of confirmation of the event: 29 Jun 2017 Reason for notification: recurrence of a listed disease Date of previous occurrence:26/04/2016 Manifestation of disease: sub-clinical infection Causal agent: _Bacillus anthracis_ Nature of diagnosis: laboratory (basic), necropsy This event pertains to a defined zone within the country. New outbreaks (1) Summary of outbreaks: Total outbreaks: 1 Outbreak 1: Myropillya, Krasnopilskyi, Sumy Date of start of the outbreak: 27 Jun 2017 Outbreak status: continuing (or date resolved not provided) Epidemiological unit: village Affected animals: Species / Susceptible / Cases / Deaths / Killed and disposed of / Slaughtered Sheep / 2 / 2 / 0 / 0 Affected population: 2 carcasses of sheep were found in the village Myropillya that were thrown away near the river Psel. The samples were collected from the carcasses and a positive result for anthrax was established. The carcasses were destroyed, disinfection was conducted, the quarantine was established and all related measures are ongoing. Outbreak statistics [rates apparent, expressed as percentages] Species / Morbidity rate / Mortality rate / Case fatality rate / Proportion susceptible animals lost* Sheep / ** / ** / 100 / ** *Removed from the susceptible population through death, destruction and/or slaughter **Not calculated because of missing information Epidemiology: Source of the outbreak(s) or origin of infection: Unknown or inconclusive Control measures: Measures applied: movement control inside the country; surveillance outside containment and/or protection zone; surveillance within containment and/or protection zone; traceability; quarantine; official disposal of carcasses, by-products and waste; control of wildlife reservoirs; zoning; disinfection; ante and post-mortem inspections; vaccination permitted (if a vaccine exists); no treatment of affected animals. Measures to be applied: No other measures Diagnostic test results: Laboratory name and type / Species / Test / Test date / Result State Scientific and Research Institute of Laboratory Diagnosis and Veterinary and Sanitary Expertise (National laboratory) / Sheep / bacteriological examination / 29 Jun 2017 / Positive Future Reporting: The event is continuing. Weekly follow-up reports will be submitted. [The location of the outbreak can be seen on the interactive map included in the OIE report at the source URL above.] -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail [There was a porcine outbreak in Khar'kov last year, also on the eastern border with Russia; see: 6 Apr 2016 Anthrax - Ukraine (02): (KK) human, porcine, OIE http://promedmail.org/post/20160406.4142864 31 Mar 2016 Anthrax - Ukraine: (KK) human, porcine http://promedmail.org/post/20160331.4131177 I doubt if this is a coincidence. If I were to hypothesize it would be that these pig owners are buying Russian pig feed, which has been related to anthrax outbreaks in the past. The alternative is that a sheep died earlier (of anthrax) and this pig scavenged the carcass or viscera; pigs are useful garbage disposal animals in rural areas. That 2016 pig was the 1st anthrax outbreak in Ukraine in many years. Otherwise there had been bovine outbreaks in 2012 in Cherkassy and Zaporozhye; a singular outbreak in 2010 in Chemernivis oblast; and 5 outbreaks in 2007, one of which was in Kharkov. It is truly sporadic. - Mod.MHJ A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  .] [", "BABESIOSIS - UNITED STATES: (WISCONSIN) 2001 - 2015 *************************************************** A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Fri 7 Jul 2017 Source: CDC. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 2017; 66(26): 687-91 [summ., edited] Citation -------- Stein E, Elbadawi LI, Kazmierczak J and Davis JP. Babesiosis Surveillance - Wisconsin, 2001-2015. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 2017;66:687-691. DOI: Introduction (see full paper at the URL above) ------------ Babesiosis is an emerging zoonotic disease caused primarily by _Babesia microti_, an intraerythocytic protozoan. _Babesia microti_, like the causal agents for Lyme disease and anaplasmosis, is endemic to the northeastern and upper midwestern United States where it is usually transmitted by the blacklegged tick, _Ixodes scapularis_. Although babesiosis is usually a mild to moderate illness, older or immunocompromised persons can develop a serious malaria-like illness that can be fatal without prompt treatment. The most common initial clinical signs and symptoms of babesiosis (fever, fatigue, chills, and diaphoresis) are nonspecific and present diagnostic challenges that can contribute to delays in diagnosis and effective treatment with atovaquone and azithromycin (1). Results of one study revealed a mean delay of 12-14 days from symptom onset to treatment (2). Knowledge of the incidence and geographic distribution of babesiosis can raise the index of clinical suspicion and facilitate more prompt diagnosis and lifesaving treatment (1). The 1st known case of babesiosis in Wisconsin was detected in 1985 (3), and babesiosis became officially reportable in the state in 2001. Wisconsin babesiosis surveillance data for 2001-2015 were analyzed in 3-year intervals to compare demographic, epidemiologic, and laboratory features among patients with cases of reported babesiosis. To determine possible reasons for an increase in reported Babesia infection, trends in electronic laboratory reporting and diagnosis by polymerase chain reaction testing (PCR) were examined. Between the 1st and last 3-year analysis intervals, there was a 26-fold increase in the incidence of confirmed babesiosis, in addition to geographic expansion. These trends might be generalizable to other states with endemic disease, similar suburbanization and forest fragmentation patterns, and warming average temperatures (4). Accurate surveillance in states where babesiosis is endemic is necessary to estimate the increasing burden of babesiosis and other tickborne diseases and to develop appropriate public health interventions for prevention and practice. References ---------- 1. Vannier EG, Diuk-Wasser MA, Ben Mamoun C, Krause PJ. Babesiosis. Infect Dis Clin North Am 2015;29:357-70. 2. White DJ, Talarico J, Chang HG, Birkhead GS, Heimberger T, Morse DL. Human babesiosis in New York State: Review of 139 hospitalized cases and analysis of prognostic factors. Arch Intern Med 1998;158:2149-54. 3. Steketee RW, Eckman MR, Burgess EC, et al. Babesiosis in Wisconsin. A new focus of disease transmission. JAMA 1985;253:2675-8. -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts [The reported 26-fold increase in incidence from 2001 to 2015, may partly reflect increased testing of patients with unexplained febrile illness as well as the geographic spread to the east and south. - Mod.EP A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  .] [", "MERS-COV (46): SAUDI ARABIA, WHO ******************************** A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases In this update: [1] Saudi Arabia - MOH 6 Jul 2017 [2] Saudi Arabia - WHO update ****** [1] Saudi Arabia - MOH 6 Jul 2017 Date: 6 Jul 2017 Source: Saudi MOH 6 Jul 2017 As of today [Fri 7 Jul 2017], there have been a total of: 1673 laboratory-confirmed cases of MERS-CoV infection, including 679 deaths [reported case fatality rate 40.6 percent], 978 recoveries, and 16 currently active cases/infections. [As previously mentioned, the numbers of deaths, recoveries and currently active cases come from my spreadsheet tallies and differ from those listed on the Saudi MOH website; my spreadsheet counts asymptomatic infections.] Since the last ProMED-mail update [5 Jul 2017], there have been a total of: 0 newly confirmed cases/infections 0 newly reported fatalities, and 0 newly reported recoveries. -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail [As of the time of preparation of this post [8:00 PM Riyadh time], information for 7 Jul 2017 is not available on the website. Hence this update is current through yesterday, 6 Jul 2017 when there were no new cases/infections, fatalities, nor recoveries reported by Saudi Arabia. - Mod.MPP] ****** [2] Saudi Arabia - WHO update Date: 6 Jul 2017 Source: WHO Emergencies preparedness, response, Disease Outbreak News (DONs) [edited] Middle East respiratory syndrome coronavirus (MERS-CoV) - Saudi Arabia 6 Jul 2017 -------------------------------------------------------------------------------- Between [24 Jun and 3 Jul 2017], the national IHR Focal Point of Saudi Arabia reported 3 additional cases of Middle East respiratory syndrome coronavirus (MERS-CoV) infection, and 2 deaths among previously reported cases. Details of the cases MERS-CoV cases reported between [24 Jun and 3 Jul 2017]. Case no. / Date report WHO / City of residence / Age / Sex / HCW / Co-morbidities / Camel exposure / Camel milk / Exposure to other cases / Date of onset of symptoms / Date of hospitalization / Date of lab confirmation / Status / Date of outcome 1 / 2017-06-24 / Riyadh / 60 / M / No / Yes / NA / NA / NA / 2017-06-16 / 2017-06-21 / 2017-06-23 / Alive 2 / 2017-06-25 / Dammam / 30 / F / No / No / Yes / NA / NA / 2017-06-18 / 2017-06-22 / 2017-06-24 / Alive 3 / 2017-07-01 / Baha / 70 / M / No / Yes / NA / NA / NA / 2017-06-27 / 2017-06-28 / 2017-06-30 / Alive Globally, 2040 laboratory-confirmed cases of infection with MERS-CoV including at least 712 related deaths have been reported to WHO. Public health response The Ministry of Health in Saudi Arabia has identified and is following contacts of the newly reported cases, is investigating the source of infection of each case and has reinforced infection, prevention, and control measures in hospitals where cases have been identified. Update on previously reported Middle East respiratory syndrome (MERS) clusters in Riyadh The follow-up period of contacts identified during the investigations of 3 MERS clusters previously reported from Riyadh in the Disease Outbreak News published on 13 Jun 2017 , 19 Jun 2017, and 28 Jun 2017 ended on 30 Jun 2017. No further cases were identified in these clusters. -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail Rapporteur Marianne Hopp [With the ending of the nosocomial outbreaks in Saudi Arabia, MERS-CoV transmission seems to be slowing down to sporadic cases, classified as primary cases, some with history of contact with camels, others without well defined histories of known high risk exposures. The prior case in the Lebanese healthcare worker with no known contact with confirmed MERS-CoV infected individuals in the healthcare setting, and no known contact with individuals with respiratory illnesses deserves further attention as he may well serve as a clue to all of the \"primary\" cases with previously unidentified high risk exposures. The question that constantly recurs to me (and I've mentioned before) is \"Why Saudi Arabia?\". Other countries in the region have had sporadic cases, yet Saudi Arabia reported cases account for 1672 out of 2040 cases (82 percent) reported to WHO as of 3 Jul 2017. Of note, case no.1 was not reported through the Saudi MOH MERS-CoV website as yet (and will most likely be reported when the outcome is known). The HealthMap/ProMED map of Saudi Arabia can be found at:  . - Mod.MPP] [", "CHOLERA, DIARRHEA AND DYSENTERY UPDATE (67): AFRICA, ASIA ********************************************************* A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases In this update: Africa [1] Cholera - Ethiopia (Somali Region) [2] Cholera - Sudan Asia [3] Cholera - India (Gujarat State) [4] Diarrhea - Philippines (Misamis Oriental Province) ****** [1] Cholera - Ethiopia (Somali Region) Date: Fri 7 Jul 2017 Source: WHO [edited] WHO responds to new acute watery diarrhea outbreak rumour in a remote zone in Somali region of Ethiopia ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- In disease outbreak situations, rumors are as valuable as actual surveillance data. In fact, disease response teams, particularly surveillance officers, attach a lot of importance to rumors and investigate them until proven wrong or right. In several instances, disease outbreak rumors have turned out to be correct thereby contributing to early containment, reduced morbidity and mortality associated with major outbreaks. This was the case recently in Somali Region where the Government of Ethiopia, WHO and other partners are battling an outbreak of Acute Watery Diarrhea (AWD). While the AWD response team stationed in Jijiga City, Eastern Ethiopia, is now accustomed to responding to sporadic flare-ups in AWD cases in various zones of Somali region, unverified reports or rumours of 31 cases in one community were received with shock. The affected area was Danbal Woreda, in Sitti Zone about 120 kms [74.56 miles] from Jijiga city. Having received the rumour late in the afternoon, a joint response team comprising surveillance, case management, infection control, water and sanitation and risk communication officers from the Somali Regional Health Bureau (RHB), WHO and UNICEF travelled to Danbal early the next day. Sitti Zone has a semi-mountainous terrain with difficult road transport access on gravel roads, the ride was bumpy and rough, the team arrived by mid-day. The team was received and briefed by Danbal Woreda administration about the ongoing community public health event presumed to be \"dysentery\" resulting from consumption of contaminated rainwater from a pond. \"This is dysentery, there is no need to worry and the situation has since returned to normal,\" one officer assured the response team. Indeed if that was the case, there was no need to panic as dysentery is not a WHO notifiable disease, that is, not one of those diseases that threaten public health and containment is usually easy. However, WHO disease outbreak Standard Operating Procedures (SOP) demands that response officers must go to the source of the rumour, cross check information and ensure that nothing is actually happening there. That meant another 45 kms [27.96 miles] of rough road through a semi-arid terrain to the Degah-ad Kabele where the suspected outbreak was reported to have occurred. The Kabele is home to a nomadic community whose major occupation seems to be cattle keeping. This area receives 223 mm of rain a year which means people are constantly on the move in search of water and pasture. For Degah-ad, the people travel 3kms [1.86 miles] to the nearest water point. It is not surprising therefore, that when it rained on one of the days preceding [Wed 28 Jun 2017], people used water collected in a pond for domestic and animal consumption. Unfortunately, that water seems to have been contaminated with the germs that cause AWD given that latrine coverage in this area is almost zero and open defecation is common practice. The history, signs and symptoms of the illness as described by the healthcare workers interviewed were found to be consistent with the national case definition for AWD. The team concluded that the cases were attributable to AWD outbreak. In such situations, WHO standard procedures for disease outbreak containment must apply. Consequently, healthcare workers at the health post were orientated on the AWD case definition; case management and infection control measures required while providing care for AWD cases. Additionally, WHO supported the RHB to scale up support in outbreak surveillance, social mobilization, community sensitization and awareness to control further spread of the AWD outbreak. Surveillance, which is the intelligence arm of the response has been particularly strengthened to ensure that all cases are detected and reported as soon as they occur. Staff are being repurposed to the area for this purpose and supervision and daily reporting is more vigorous and mandatory. Risk communication that ensures constant communication between the affected communities and the authorities was also instituted immediately by identifying risk factors, power centers and influential people in this highly patriarchal community. The power centers or influencers were identified as the clan head, the religious leaders and the teacher at the Quran School that currently serves as the health post. These are not only influential in the community but they also expressed willingness to educate and change behaviors of the people for the better. \"Previously we were washing our hands after eating so that we don't smell the food we have eaten but now we are telling everyone to wash hands before eating,\" said the clan head. This and other key behaviors were endorsed as the right way to go and the influencers were requested to take the messages house-to-house in their community. Availability of clean safe water and construction of latrines on the rocky terrain remain big challenges facing the AWD response teams in this area. But with the rumors constantly coming in and being investigated immediately, participation of the community leaders and prompt treatment of cases, many lives will definitely be saved and normalcy restored in the entire Somali Region. -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts [In some areas in east Africa, AWD is a euphemism for cholera. - Mod.LL] ****** [2] Cholera - Sudan Date: Thu 6 Jul 2017 Source: Radio Dabanga [edited] A total of 4 people died of cholera in Delling in South Kordofan, including a university student. Three other students also contracted cholera. Meanwhile the University of Kadugli refuses to postpone the start of the new year. A young woman who studies at the University of Delling died of cholera after being treated at the Delling Hospital, health workers in South Kordofan reported to Radio Dabanga on [Wed 5 Jul 2017]. Up to 3 patients died in El Nila, east of Delling, on [Tue 4 and Wed 5 Jul 2017]. Delling Hospital received 3 new cases of cholera, all of whom are students at the Delling University. In total, 24 people are being treated for cholera in the hospital. A number of people from El Nila, reportedly 20, contracted cholera and were admitted to hospital. Local authorities decided to postpone the opening of the basic schools for one week, to prevent the spread of the epidemic among school children. The authorities have allowed teachers only to go to schools for preparations. The medical isolation centre for cholera cases in Kadugli, South Kordofan's state capital, recorded a case on [Mon 3 Jul 2017] and 2 on [Tue 4 Jul 2017]. A witness said that the residents of the town requested the university administration to postpone the re-opening of the university for at least 2 more weeks until the approach against the spread of the disease will be clear. \"But the university administration refused, on the grounds that it is not known when the epidemic will end,\" the witness said. The special centres in El Tadamon locality have recorded 10 cholera cases - 7 of whom are from Um El Kheirat - from [Sun 2-Wed 5 Jul 2017). Two cases of cholera were reported at El Wakra and one in Balula in El Tadamon. Doctors reported that at least 31 people have died of cholera and 313 others have been infected in Abu Zabad locality, West Kordofan, between [Sun 4 Jun and Wed 5 Jul 2017]. \"There are now 10 hospitalized cases,\" the doctor said. \"We ask help to fill the acute shortage of local staff.\" In North Kordofan, the cholera isolation centre in El Birka administrative unit received a person suffering from cholera on [Tue 4 Jul 2017]. The Centre's director told Radio Dabanga that the total number of cases, since the outbreak of the disease, has amounted to 59 cases. He reported a death toll of 5 people. Reports from camp Kario, mainly inhabited by South Sudanese refugees, in East Darfur stated that the number of cases has amounted to 153 people, including 5 deaths, between June 2017 and 6 Jul 2017. The Khor Omar medical isolation centre on the western outskirts of Ed Daein has received more than 100 cases of cholera on [Wed 5 Jul 2017], a health worker told this station. \"All cholera patients at Ed Daein Hospital were referred to Khor Omar centre.\" Meanwhile a source from Hillet Musa, east of Tabit in North Darfur, reported that a person died of cholera and 3 others were infected on [Wed 5 Jul 2017]. -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts ****** [3] Cholera - India (Gujarat State) Date: Thu 6 Jul 2017 Source: Times of India [edited] Vadodara district collector P Bharathi on [Wed 5 Jul 2017] issued a notification declaring Dabhoi town and the residential areas falling within Dabhoi nagarpalika of Vadodara district as cholera-affected. The district administration has also been asked to take necessary steps to curb spread of the water-borne disease in 8 km [4.97 miles] area surrounding Dabhoi town which has been declared as cholera-hit. The notification comes in view of number of cholera positive cases reported from Talavpura, Chabila and Urja no khancho areas of Dabhoi. The notification issued under The Epidemic Diseases Act, 1897 will remain in force for 3 months. Dabhoi mamlatdar has been appointed as cholera control officer to supervise preventive measures in the region. -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts [The extent of the cholera outbreak is unclear. - Mod.LL] ****** [4] Diarrhea - Philippines (Misamis Oriental Province) Date: Fri 7 Jul 2017 Source: Manila Times [edited] An elderly man died while 400 others were admitted to different hospitals as Misamis Oriental on [Fri 7 Jul 2017], declared an outbreak of diarrhea in the coastal town of Medina. Freitchie Virtudazo, spokesman of Medina, identified the lone fatality as a 71-year-old, who died while undergoing treatment at the Northern Mindanao Medical Center (NMMC) in Cagayan de Oro. She said that as of 7 am on [Fri 7 Jul 2017], the municipal government already tallied a total of 400 diarrhea victims prompting them to officially declare an outbreak of diarrhea in the town. Virtudazo said the local government unit (LGU) has called for volunteers to assist the victims as more people were deployed to investigate and find out the possible causes of the outbreak. \"The report about the diarrhea started on [Thu 29 Jun 2017] but the LGU became suspicious because the number of reported victims has grown since then,\" Virtudazo added. Meanwhile, Misamis Oriental Gov. Yevgeny Vincente Emano ordered the medical staff of the Provincial Health Office (PHO) to be on standby alert after declaring the diarrhea outbreak. He said medicines such as metronidazole, paracetamol, cotrimoxazole, Oresol and Waterine, a liquid solution for drinking water, had been dispatched to the Medina Rural Health Unit (RHU). Ma Alma Enriquez, Medina rural health physician, said health officials suspected the town's potable water source in Barangay Kibuntod to have been contaminated with coliform bacteria. Enriquez said that some victims suffered stomach pains while some have difficulty standing due to severe pain. But not all of them were admitted to hospitals because some decided to stay home. The municipal doctor asked the residents to 1st boil the tap water before drinking it to ensure that it is safe and clean. [Byline: Cris Diaz] -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail [The etiology or etiologies of this reasonably large outbreak of diarrhea in Misamis Oriental are unclear. - Mod.LL A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  .] [", "HEPATITIS A - USA (12): (MICHIGAN) FATAL, REQUEST FOR INFORMATION ***************************************************************** A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Fri 7 Jul 2017 11:39 AM Source: WXYZ [edited] A hepatitis A outbreak has caused 10 deaths over the last year in metro Detroit and has Michigan health officials on alert and investigating. According to the Michigan Department of Health and Human Services, there have been nearly 190 confirmed cases of hepatitis A in the city of Detroit, as well as Macomb, Oakland, Wayne and St Clair counties. Those cases have come between 1 Aug 2016 and 26 Jun 2017. That represents an increase of nearly 10-times during the same time in the previous year. According to the MDHHS, the ages range from 21 to 86-years-old, with the average age of 44-years-old. Up to 66 percent of the people with the confirmed cases are men, and 87 percent of people have been hospitalized. The MDHHS said that the transition appears to be \"person-to-person through illicit drug use, sexual activity, and close contact among household members.\" Half of the case have a history of substance abuse and 20 percent are also infected with hepatitis C. The MDHHS is asking anyone who is at-risk to get vaccinated. Those at risk include:  - People who use injection and non-injection illegal drugs  - People who participate in commercial exchange of sexual practices  - Close personal contacts (e.g., household, sexual) of hepatitis A patients  - Men who have sex with men  - People with liver diseases, such as hepatitis B or hepatitis C.  - Persons with chronic liver disease have an elevated risk of death from liver failure  - Any person who wishes to be immune to hepatitis A  - People who live, work, or recreate in SE Michigan and are concerned about getting hepatitis A Anyone with hepatitis A is infectious for 2 weeks before getting symptoms. Symptoms include jaundice (yellowing of the skin), fever, fatigue, loss of appetite, nausea, vomiting, abdominal pain, dark urine, and light-colored stools. [Byline: Max White] -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail [A total of 10 deaths recorded in about 190 cases is a case fatality rate of about 4.5 percent which is substantially higher than what is reported overall for hepatitis A (0.1 percent) and more than twice as high as the parallel outbreak in San Diego County, California. It would be important to know what risk factors may have been present in the fatal infections. The epidemiology of the outbreak is less defined than in San Diego where almost all the cases are homeless but in both there is a high percentage of hospitalized cases. The percentage of cases related to men who have sex with men is not defined. - Mod.LL A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  .] [", "JAPANESE ENCEPHALITIS - MALAYSIA (SARAWAK) ******************************************* A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Fri 7 Jul 2017 09:05 PM GMT+8 Source: Malay Mail [edited] A case of the Japanese encephalitis (JE) virus involving a 7-year-old boy was reported in Sarawak, said Health Minister Datuk Seri Dr S. Subramaniam. He said the child from Taman Sentoria, Jalan Stakan in Kota Samarahan was hospitalized at Sarawak General Hospital on 25 May [2017]. \"We (ministry) received the report regarding the case yesterday [Thu 6 Jul 2017] from the Sarawak Health Department (SHD) and we will continue to monitor it. \" \"We will inform if there is a new case. It is only an isolated case which may be related to the lifestyle of the community in the area,\" he told reporters after officiating the 11th International Symposium on Paediatric Pain. He said the child suffered the symptoms of fever, headache and behavioural change before he was confirmed with JE positive through cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) and blood tests. Subramaniam said the SHD will continue its control and prevention actions through fogging and larviciding activity to kill mosquito larvae in the area. In addition, JE vaccine would be given to children below 15-years-old. The JE virus is transmitted to humans through the bite of infected _Culex_ mosquitoes from infected pigs [and birds] but the transmission did not occur from humans to other humans. -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail [This is the 1st report of Japanese encephalitis that ProMED has ever posted for Sarawak. However, cases of Japanese encephalitis occur sporadically in Malaysia. South East Asia, including Malaysia, is endemic for Japanese encephalitis virus (JEV). There were reports that a total of 16 Japanese encephalitis (JE) cases occurred nationwide since the start of 2014, including 4 deaths, according to the Malaysia Health Ministry. There was a significant outbreak of JEV infections in 1998-1999. The current case is well within the endemic area. In JE virus-endemic areas, birds, especially ardeids (herons and relatives), are reservoir hosts of the virus, which is transmitted by several species of mosquitoes in the genus _Culex_. Pigs can serve as amplifying hosts. Sarawak is one of 2 Malaysian states on the island of Borneo. Located in northwest Borneo, Sarawak is bordered by the Malaysian state of Sabah to the northeast, Kalimantan, the Indonesian portion of Borneo, to the south, and the independent country of Brunei in the north. A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map showing the location of Malaysia can be accessed at: and Sarawak can be accessed at . - Mod.TY A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  .] [", "HANTAVIRUS - AMERICAS (38): USA (WASHINGTON) ******************************************** A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Thu 6 Jul 2017 Source: Seattle Patch [edited] State health officials on [Thu 6 Jul 2017] said that a 5th case of [a] deadly hantavirus has been confirmed in the state, bringing the total number of confirmed cases to 5 in 2017. That's the highest number of hantavirus cases in the state since 1999, according to state officials. The cases 1st came to light in King County after an Issaquah man died from the virus in February [2017]. A 2nd woman from Issaquah contracted the virus, but later recovered. A 3rd case occurred in King County at the end of 2016 in Redmond. Since those cases, [a] hantavirus has emerged in Franklin, Spokane, and Skagit counties. The victims in Spokane and Franklin counties died, while the Skagit victim survived. Hantavirus [infection] is very deadly, with a mortality rate of about 38 percent, according to the Centers for Disease Control. Seasonal flu, by comparison, has a mortality rate of about 2.5 percent. Humans contract [a] hantavirus by coming into contact with the feces, urine, or saliva of infected deer mice [_Peromyscus manipulates_]. Humans often come into contact with deer mice droppings while cleaning or working inside outdoor structures, like barns or recreational vehicles. There were also 5 cases reported in 1999. And until this year [2017], 1999 was the only year on record where hantavirus cases reached 5 more. There were 4 cases each in 1995 and 1996, according to state records. The state Department of Health hosts a webpage featuring tips on how to avoid coming into contact with hantavirus. -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts [The hantavirus involved in the above and previous reports is not stated, but Sin Nombre virus is very likely involved. Sin Nombre hantavirus is endemic in the western USA, including Washington State. Deer mice commonly move into dwellings with the onset of cold weather. In the spring and summer, cleaning out areas with deer mice and their nests should be done with the same precautions mentioned above. Materials should be wetted down with a bleach solution and handled in an open-air space, with gloves and a mask worn. Deer mice, _Peromyscus maniculatus_, are the reservoir hosts of the virus and shed it in feces, urine, and saliva. Sin Nombre virus infections can be serious, with a relatively high case fatality rate associated with hantavirus cardiopulmonary syndrome. Prompt medical attention is essential. An image of the deer mouse, _P. maniculatus_, can be seen at  . A map showing the location of Washington State in the northwest of the lower 48 USA states can be accessed at  . Skagit County can be seen on the map at . - Mod.TY A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  . A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  .] [", "LEGIONELLOSIS - EUROPE (03): 2011-2015 ************************************** A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Fri 07 July 2017 Source: Microservices [In Spanish, trans. Mod.JG, edited] A study has been published in Eurosurveillance, which compiled all the data on legionnaires' disease in Europe for the period 2011 to 2015 [1]. This publication is from the European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control. The epidemiological surveillance of legionellosis in Europe is managed by the European Legionnaires' disease Surveillance Network (ELDSNET). Between 2011 and 2015, 29 European countries reported 30 532 cases of legionnaires' disease (28 188 confirmed cases, and 2344 probable cases). A total of 4 countries (Germany, France, Italy, and Spain) accounted for 70.3 percent of the total number of cases, but these countries represent half (50 percent) of the European population. The [incidence] rate for legionellosis increased from 0.97 per 100 000 inhabitants in 2011 to 1.30 in 2015. Up to 80 percent of cases occurred in persons more than 50-years-old, and the [case fatality] rate was 9.3 percent; the data has been stable for the last 5 years. Only 0.5% percent of the cases (159) had occurred in persons less than 20-years-old. In nearly 20 percent of the cases (19.9 percent, 5357), the infection was associated with travel and with staying outside home during the usual incubation period. The cases associated with healthcare facilities were 1973, representing 7.3 percent of the total number. Nearly 10 percent of the cases (9.9 percent) were associated with an outbreak or to a cluster, and the remaining 90.1 percent were isolated cases. The causative microorganism was _Legionella pneumophila_ in 96.2 percent of the cases, and the serogroup 1 was the most frequently identified, accounting for 82.9 percent of all. [1. Beaut\u00e9 J, on behalf of the European Legionnaires' Disease Surveillance Network. Legionnaires' disease in Europe, 2011 to 2015. Eurosurveillance 2017;22(27):pii=30566. DOI:  . Available at .] -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail [The follow is the abstract extracted from reference 1 above: Abstract -------- \"Under the coordination of the European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control (ECDC), the European Legionnaires' disease Surveillance Network (ELDSNet) conducts surveillance of Legionnaires' disease (LD) in Europe. Between 2011 and 2015, 29 countries reported 30 532 LD cases to ECDC (28 188 (92.3 percent) confirmed and 2344 (7.7 percent) probable). Four countries (France, Germany, Italy and Spain) accounted for 70.3 percent of all reported cases, although their combined populations represented only 49.9 percent of the study population. The age-standardized rate of all cases increased from 0.97 cases/100 000 population in 2011 to 1.30 cases/100 000 population in 2015, corresponding to an annual average increase of 0.09 cases/100 000 population (95 percent CI 0.02-0.14; 0.02). Demographics and infection setting remained unchanged with ca 70 percent of cases being community-acquired and 80 percent occurring in people aged 50 years and older. Clinical outcome was known for 23 164 cases, of whom 2161 (9.3 percent) died. The overall case fatality ratio decreased steadily from 10.5 percent in 2011 to 8.1 percent in 2015, probably reflecting improved reporting completeness. Five countries (Austria, Czech Republic, Germany, Italy, and Norway) had increasing age-standardised LD notification rates over the 2011-15 period, but there was no increase in notification rates in countries where the 2011 rate was below 0.5/100 000 population.\" - Mod.ML A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  .] [", "UNDIAGNOSED ILLNESS - LIBERIA (09): WHO, FATAL, NEISSERIA MENINGITIDIS SEROGROUP C DIAGNOSED ******************************************************************************************** A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Thu 6 Jul 2017 Source: WHO / Emergencies preparedness, response [edited] This is an update to the Disease Outbreak News \"Unexplained cluster of deaths - Liberia\" published on 5 May 2017 and update published on 10 May 2017. On 25 April 2017, the Ministry of Health (MoH) of Liberia notified WHO and partners of a cluster of sudden deaths of unknown aetiology in Sinoe County. The event started on 23 April 2017, when an 11-year-old female had been admitted to hospital presenting with diarrhea, vomiting, and mental confusion after attending the funeral of a religious leader on 22 April 2017. The child died within one hour of admission. Between 23 April and 7 May [2017], a total of 31 cases including 13 deaths (42 percent case fatality rate), and one case with neurological sequelae of an unknown disease associated with attending a funeral were reported from 3 counties (Sinoe, Grand Bassa, and Montserrado). The majority of cases did not present with fever, but did present with abdominal pain, diarrhea, vomiting, and mental confusion. Some patients presented with purpura and/ or petechiae. Most of the cases were related to each other either socially, through family or school. All but 2 cases attended the funeral, who were subsequently identified as contacts of the index case. On 8 May 2017, MoH informed partners and the public that specimens taken from patients tested positive for _Neisseria meningitidis_ serotype C at the United States Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). The outbreak was therefore classified as a meningococcal disease outbreak. A total of 14 cases out of 31 cases were later confirmed with presence of _Neisseria meningitidis_ C by PCR in clinical specimens conducted at the National Reference Laboratory in Liberia or clinically diagnosed due to the presence of purpura fulminans. Laboratory results were further confirmed by the National Institute for Communicable Diseases (NICD) and the National Institute of Occupational Health (NIOH) in Johannesburg, South Africa, in addition to serological results of 3 cases that were tested at Institute Pasteur in France. The temporal characteristics of this outbreak are unusual raising the hypothesis of the presence of a co-factor. Additionally, on 8 May 2017, the MoH informed partners and the public that toxicological investigations conducted by CDC on urine samples from 3 cases did not suggest that intoxication was the cause of the outbreak. The samples were tested for pesticide metabolites and toxic metals. On 20 June 2017, the MoH was notified that results of toxicological investigations carried out at the Center for Analytical Chemistry in Vienna, Austria, on food samples, water and a soft drink that were consumed during the funeral, were not suggestive of intoxication. The samples were tested for more than 600 fungal and bacterial toxins and these were either not detected or were within regulatory limits. Public health response ---------------------- The MoH supported by the WHO, CDC, Africa Field Epidemiology Network (AFENET), and other partners started on-site investigations one day after the alert. No disease was identified at the start of the outbreak and Ebola virus disease (EVD) was ruled out within 24 hours of the alert. The National Public Health Institute of Liberia was activated to lead the response. WHO, CDC, UNICEF, and MSF reinforced the field response, and international coordination and information sharing was supported though the Global Outbreak Alert and Response Network (GOARN). The following response activities were implemented: Most of the cases from Sinoe were managed in the local hospital in Greenville, the capital of Sinoe County and received treatment as per EVD protocol. Infection, prevention, and control measures were implemented in the local hospital. Active case searching was conducted and identified attendees of the funeral and close contacts of the cases were followed up for 21 days. Autopsies were conducted on 2 patients. Approximately 70 specimens (58 clinical specimens and 12 food samples) were collected for laboratory testing and sent to the national reference laboratory in Margibi County, the United States, France, South Africa, and Austria. Chemoprophylaxis was distributed to all attendees, contacts of the cases, health workers, and burial personnel. A meningitis C vaccination strategy was discussed but not implemented due to the lack of secondary transmission. Social mobilization was implemented with the support of UNICEF. WHO risk assessment ------------------- In the absence of clear understanding of the epidemiology of this outbreak, the risk of recurrence cannot be excluded. However, based on current understanding of the epidemiology of meningococcal disease, the risk is considered low. The efficient and timely implementation of the response to this event is a result of the expertise developed in Liberia following the large outbreak of EVD in 2014. This led to the quick identification of the event, testing and ruling out EVD as the cause of the outbreak, identification of contacts and their follow-up and the collaboration of the country with partners to perform laboratory testing of human and environmental specimens, which led to the identification of the cause of the disease. WHO advice ---------- WHO does not recommend any restriction on travel and trade to Liberia on the basis of the information available on the current event. WHO recommends the inclusion of meningococcal septicemia in routine surveillance in Liberia as an epidemic prone disease together with meningitis due to _Neisseria meningitidis_. -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail [Acute meningococcal bacteremia (meningococcemia) may present with or without meningitis. Its severe form, fulminant meningococcemia is especially frightening because of its rapid evolution, the patient becoming critically ill within hours; an initial petechial rash (small hemorrhagic spots) progressively becomes confluent cutaneous and mucous membrane hemorrhages (purpura fulminans), accompanied by gangrene of digits or limbs, shock, multiorgan failure, and death, as a result of massive disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC). Host susceptibility to acute meningococcemia is genetically determined and the individuals involved in this outbreak may be genetically related to one another, all having attended the same funeral. Deficiency in complement components (C5-C9), factor D or properdin have been found in patients with meningococcemia, as have other genetic factors, such a toll-like receptor 4 variant genotype, which was associated with increased mortality in children with invasive meningococcal disease ( ). The establishement of _Neisseria meningitidis_ as the etiological agent and rule out of other possible causitive agents illustrates the importance of laboratory support and functional international networks. In this outbreak, in addition to the Liberian national reference laboratory in Margibi County, Liberia, samples were sent to 5 laboratories in the United States, France, South Africa, and Austria. - Mod.TY Maps of Liberia can be found at and . - Mod.ML The establishement of _Neisseria meningitidis_ as the etiological agent and rule out of other possible causitive agents illustrates the importance of laboratory support and functional international networks. In this outbreak, in addition to the Liberian national reference laboratory in Margibi County, Liberia, samples were sent to 5 laboratories in the United States, France, South Africa, and Austria. - Mod. TY A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  .] [", "CYCLOSPORIASIS - MEXICO: (GUANAJUATO) REQUEST FOR INFORMATION ************************************************************* A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Sat 8 Jul 2017 Source: a subscriber whose identity is known to ProMED-mail, but who prefers to remain unnamed [edited] An outbreak of diarrhea caused by the protozoan parasite _Cyclospora cayetanensis_, has been reported to ProMED in the city of Leon, State of Guanajuato, Mexico. After a graduation party on June 16 [2017], where about 1000 people attended, approximately 80 percent of them got sick. Many are still symptomatic; many required hospitalization. Cyclospora has been identified by microscopy and one case by molecular methods. -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail [_Cyclospora cayetanensis_ is a human protozoan parasite excreted in feces from infected persons. There is, as far as we know, no animal reservoir. The oocysts excreted in feces are thought to require days to weeks in favorable environmental conditions to sporulate (become infective), and therefore direct person-to-person transmission is highly unlikely. There have been several multi-state outbreaks in the United States and Canada in 2015 and 2016 (see ProMED posts listed below). These outbreaks have been traced to lettuce imported from Mexico. A report from the UK from August 2015 reported cyclosporiasis in UK tourists returning from Riviera Maya, Mexico. Thus the outbreak reported here most likely comes from vegetables or berries contaminated by sporulated _C. cayetanensis_ oocysts because human waste has been used as a fertilizer. Additional information from health authorities including epidemiological characteristics of the outbreak and any implicated foods would be appreciated. - Mod.EP For more information on _Cyclospora cayetanensis_ see: A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  .] [", "CHOLERA, DIARRHEA AND DYSENTERY UPDATE (68): ASIA (PHILIPPINES) CHOLERA CONFIRMED ********************************************************************************* A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Sat 8 Jul 2017 Source: EpiCore Global Surveillance Project [edited] The national reference laboratory for bacterial enteric diseases in the Research Institute for Tropical Medicine has tested 27 rectal swabs from Medina, Misamis Oriental sent by the regional epidemiology and surveillance unit (RESU) region 10, and 17/27 rectal swabs are positive for _Vibrio cholera_ serotype Ogawa, biotype El Tor. -- Communicated by: EpiCore Global Surveillance Project [ProMED acknowledges the continued efforts of the EpiCore Global Surveillance Project members in reporting important information regarding outbreaks. As a review, the flagellar (H) antigens of _Vibrio cholerae_ are shared with many water vibrios and, therefore, are of no use in distinguishing strains causing epidemic cholera. The O (somatic) antigens, however, do distinguish strains of _V. cholerae_ into 139 known serogroups. Almost all of these strains of _V. cholerae_ are nonvirulent. Until the emergence of the Bengal (O139) strain (which is \"non-O1\"), a single serogroup, designated O1, has been responsible for epidemic cholera. There are 3 distinct O1 serotypes, named Ogawa, Inaba, and Hikojima, each of which may display the \"classical\" or El Tor phenotype (or biotype). The biotypes are distinguished by their expression of surface antigens A, B, and C. Ogawa contains antigens A and B; Inaba antigens A and C; and Hikojima antigens A, B, and C. The latter serotype is relatively rare. - Mod.LL A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  .] [", "ANTHRAX - UKRAINE: (SUMY) PORCINE, OIE, CORRECTION OVINE ******************************************************** A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Sat 8 Jul 2017 Source: OIE, WAHID (World Animal Health Information Database), weekly disease information 2017; 30(28) [edited] This report was erroneously titled \"porcine\" but refers to anthrax in ovines. ProMED regrets the error and thanks Ann Lindberg for bringing it to our attention. - Mods.MHJ/LM [ A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  .] [", "MUMPS UPDATE (22): NEW ZEALAND, USA *********************************** A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases In this update: New Zealand --- [1] Aukland alert USA --- [2] Massachusetts (Harvard college) alert [3] New Hampshire (Dartmouth College) [4] Massachusetts Latino community ****** New Zealand --- [1] Aukland alert Date: Mon 3 July 2017 Source: NZ City [edited] Health officials are appealing to parents to immunize their children after an \"unrelenting mumps outbreak\" hits Auckland. An \"unrelenting mumps outbreak\" hitting Auckland has health officials appealing to parents to immunize their children. More than 130 cases have been reported in the city this year [2017], compared with 35 in 2016, the Auckland Regional Public Health Service says. In 80 percent of cases, the patient has not been fully vaccinated. \"It is disappointing because mumps is a preventable and serious disease,\" the service's clinical director Julia Peters said. \"Most recover from this disease. However in the last 6 months a number of people have suffered from severe complications.\" This included some adolescent males who were treated in hospital for pain and swelling in their testicles, which in rare cases can result in infertility. In other cases, some females experienced ovarian inflammation and another person developed meningitis. Non-immune pregnant women who catch the disease risk miscarriage in the 1st 3 months. In rare cases, mumps can cause permanent hearing loss. With almost 70 percent of this year's cases occurring in those aged between 10 and 19, Dr Peters urged parents to ensure their families' free measles mumps and rubella (MMR) vaccinations were up to date. Mumps can spread quickly among those who are not immune, and one infected individual can cause an outbreak at a secondary school because immunity in that age group is well below the national average. \"We are in the midst of an outbreak and already many students are scrambling to catch up on school work after missing school for several weeks,\" Dr Peters said. -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts [A map of New Zealand can be found at Healthmap  ] ****** USA --- [2] Massachusetts (Harvard college) alert Date: Fri 23 Jun 2017 Source: Boston Globe [edited] A total of 2 members of the Harvard University community have been diagnosed with mumps, according to an e-mail sent to Harvard students and staff. The infections were confirmed [Thu 22 Jun 2017] and coincide with several other mumps diagnoses in the Boston area over the past month, Dr Paul J. Barreira, director of Harvard University Health Services, said in the e-mail. Those infected by the virus were not identified, but one of them is connected to the Harvard Biolabs complex on Divinity Avenue in Cambridge, according to Leslie Kirwan, dean for administration and finance in Harvard's Faculty of Arts and Sciences. Kirwan said in the e-mail that those who have recently been in the Biolabs facility should take special note of the alert. [Byline: Jeremy C. Fox] -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail promed@promedmail.org [The Massachusetts Department of Public Health (DPH) issued a health alert for a Boston area mumps outbreak on Mon 5 Jun, to healthcare providers and local boards of health. See [4] below. >From 1 Jan -- 17 Jun 2017, 44 states and the District of Columbia in the US reported mumps infections in 3562 people to CDC. Mumps is no longer very common in the United States, but case numbers vary from year to year; mumps cases can range from roughly a couple hundred to a couple thousand. For example in 2016, there were approximately 5833 cases reported to CDC, and in 2012, there were 229. Before the U.S. mumps vaccination program started in 1967, about 186 000 cases were reported each year, but the actual number of cases was likely much higher due to under-reporting. Since the pre-vaccine era, there has been a more than 99 percent decrease in mumps cases in the United States. See map of cases and figure with number of cases over years at  - Mod.LK] ****** [3] New Hampshire (Dartmouth College) Date: Thu 6 Jul 2017 Source: Fox News [edited] Health officials confirmed on [Wed 5 Jul 20917] that a Dartmouth College student has a case of the mumps and has been placed in isolation. A statement said the school's health providers are working with state officials to manage and test students with potential symptoms of the disease. Students are being asked to contact Dartmouth College Health Services about any health concerns, while staff members and faculty are advised to consult their primary care physicians, The Union Leader reported. \"We are writing to you today to provide you with information you will need to be an active part of the response to prevent the spread of mumps on campus,\" Dr Ann Bracken, director of clinical medical services at the college health service, told students via email. As of [Thu 6 Jul 2017], no other students had been tested for mumps, which the college requires vaccination against in order to register for classes with the exception of those who are exempted under specific circumstances, The Leader Union reported. Mumps may cause a patient to experience puffy cheeks, swollen jaw, fever, headache, muscle aches, tiredness, loss of appetite or swollen salivary glands. According to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), symptoms can appear 16--18 days after infection, or up to 25 days after. The virus is contagious and could cause life-threatening complications if left untreated. -- Submitted by Dr. Jarod Hanson, DVM, PhD, DACVPM ProMED-mail Associate editor [A Healthmap of the United States can be found at  ] ****** [4] Massachusetts Latino community Date: Wed 5 Jul 2017 9:15 AM Source: Mass Live [edited] The Massachusetts Department of Public Health says it will be reaching out to Latino communities in the state to increase awareness about the mumps virus, commonly spread through infected saliva, and to encourage vaccination against the potentially serious disease. The Massachusetts Department of Public Health says it will be reaching out to Latino communities to increase awareness about the mumps virus, commonly spread through infected saliva, and to encourage vaccination against the potentially serious, highly infectious disease with the measles, mumps, and rubella [MMR] vaccine. According to the DPH, 12 new cases of mumps have been diagnosed since the end of March [2017] in the commonwealth among Latino residents of Chelsea, Boston, and Revere. Those diagnosed range in age from 20 -- 41, may represent a change in the epidemiology of mumps in the state, which experienced a large outbreak last year [2016], as none has any known connection to higher education, according to the DPH. To date, according to the DPH, the majority of confirmed and probable mumps cases in the commonwealth have been among vaccinated college students and others linked to colleges and universities. It is believed most of the Latino individuals diagnosed since March [2017] have not been vaccinated, and none is known to have traveled internationally. MMR vaccination is highly protective against mumps and is recommended for children and adults,\" said Monica Bharel, the state's public health commissioner, in a statement. \"In addition, those who have mumps should stay isolated at home for 5 days after their onset of swelling. Mumps is usually a mild disease but can cause serious illness. If you think you have mumps, stay home and call your healthcare provider.'' The DPH alerted healthcare providers and local boards of health, in the Greater Boston area, to the outbreak 5 June 2017. According to the DPH, those diagnosed presented symptoms of mumps between 24 Mar and 31 May [2017], and included members of the Colombian, Dominican, Guatemalan, and Salvadoran communities. None is known to have traveled internationally prior to becoming ill. For the majority of the residents, vaccination histories are unknown; most are believed to be unvaccinated against mumps. DPH and local health departments are investigating the clusters of outbreaks and instituting measures to prevent further infection. Unvaccinated individuals are most susceptible to mumps infection. Mumps virus is spread through infected respiratory tract secretions. It can be spread within 3 -- 6 feet when an infected person coughs or sneezes or with direct contact with infected secretions, such as sharing water bottles. In 2016, according to the DPH, Massachusetts experienced a large mumps outbreak with 252 reported cases, which is more than 15 times the usual number of mumps cases. Those cases were part of a national mumps outbreak, which saw more than 5800 mumps cases, the largest number in a decade. So far this year [2017] the mumps outbreak continues in Massachusetts, with nearly 300 suspected cases of mumps investigated and 35 cases confirmed, according to the DPH. [Byline: Anne-Gerard Flynn] -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts [See earlier posts on mumps to learn more about complications and vaccination schedule. - Mod.LK A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  .] [", "RABIES (29): ASIA (PHILIPPINES, MALAYSIA-BORNEO) HUMAN, ANIMAL ************************************************************** A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases [1] Philippines, Bataan, human, canine [2, 3] Malaysia (Borneo), human, canine suspected ex-Indonesia ****** [1] Philippines, Bataan, human, canine Date: Wed 5 Jul 2017 10:01 PM Source: Manila Bulletin [edited] A total of 3 persons died after being bitten by rabid dogs while another 15 dogs were placed under observation after testing positive for the dreaded virus. As this developed, Dr Albert Venturina, Bataan provincial veterinarian appealed to the pet owners have their animals vaccinated against rabies. Venturina said that Bataan Governor Abet Garcia has directed the conduct of anti-rabies and vaccination drives down to the barangay [the smallest administrative division in the Philippines] level to prevent casualties. Venturina said that in addition to the stock of the province, 2 [named] multi national companies had donated anti-rabies vaccines to the province. \"They are very supportive of our campaign against rabies and helpful to the people of Bataan,\" said Dr Ventura. He appealed to individuals bitten by dogs and other animals to immediately seek medical attention to prevent the deadly virus from spreading to the brain. Once a person is bitten by rabies-infected animal, Venturina said the victim may have only up to 3 months to live, if left untreated.[comment] [Byline: Mar T Supnad] -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail [Though, fortunately, not in every single person, bitten by an infected animal, rabies eventually develops, post-exposure treatment should be always applied in persons exposed to infection from a rabid or suspected-to-be rabid animal. WHO's Guide for rabies post-exposure prophylaxis is available at  . - Mod.AS] ****** [2] Malaysia (Borneo), human, canine suspected ex-Indonesia Date: Wed 5 Jun 2017 Source: Free Malaysia Today [edited] Health Minister Dr S Subramaniam says the rabies outbreak in Serian may be due to a serious outbreak in Kalimantan, and a wild dog may have crossed the border and brought it into Sarawak. He said the health ministry was informed that there had been an active outbreak of rabies in Kalimantan. However, no figures were provided on the number of cases reported there. Subramaniam said it was not an unusual occurrence, adding that it had happened before where a stray dog with the rabies infection had crossed over the Thailand border into Perlis, spreading the infection. \"If humans can cross through our forest, I'm sure a dog can too,\" Subramaniam said at a press conference here today. He said his ministry is currently helping identify the symptoms of rabies among those who have been bitten by dogs. Subramaniam said 11 active case detection (ACD) teams are on the ground to provide health education related to rabies as well as information on preventive measures to the residents of villages in the area. \"They have visited 19 villages and covered 2098 doors/houses and checked 6094 people so far,\" he said. The 68 people reported to have suffered dog bites in the area since 1 Apr 2017 will be given the vaccine and monitored as rabies symptoms take some time to surface. \"We have sufficient amounts of vaccine to manage the outbreak, for both the people and animals. \"We are giving vaccinations to those bitten in the perimeter of 10 kilometres from where there have been confirmed cases of rabies,\" Subramaniam said. He added that the veterinary department has also been conducting checks on dogs in the surrounding areas, both strays and pets. Subramaniam said pet dogs may be given priority for vaccination as they are in constant contact with humans. He added that the decision on how strays would be vaccinated will be left to the veterinary department. He advised people to take precautions and get their pets vaccinated with the anti-rabies vaccine. It was reported today that 2 of 3 rabies-infected children in Sarawak had died. The 3rd victim, a 7-year-old girl, has been categorised as critically ill and is still in the intensive care unit being ventilated. [Byline: Vanesha Shurentheran] -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail ****** [3] Malaysia (Borneo), human, canine suspected ex-Indonesia Date: Tue 4 Jul 2017 Source: Malaysia Digest [edited] The Health Ministry has not ruled out the possibility the rabies or mad dog virus that infected 3 children in Serian, Sarawak could have been transmitted from Kalimantan, Indonesia. Deputy Health Minister Datuk Seri Dr Hilmi Yahaya said previously 9 similar cases were reported in that neighboring country and his ministry did not rule out that possibility due to the position of Serian, which lies next to Kalimantan, as the source of the rabies outbreak in the district. \"But the public need not worry because it is under control and so far there is no new rabies positive cases reported in Sarawak or any other states. \" \"The Health Department with the cooperation of the Veterinary Department in every state is constantly monitoring the situation,\" he told reporters after flagging off the 29th Kuala Lumpur SEA Games Torch Run in Sekolah Kebangsaan (SK) Sungai Rusa, Balik Pulau Parliamentary constituency level here today [Tue 4 Jul 2017]. On [Sat 1 Jul 2017], Health director-general Datuk Dr Noor Hisham Abdullah said 3 children, including 2 siblings, aged 4, 6 and 7, in Serian district, Sarawak were infected by rabies, which was notified by the Sarawak General Hospital in Kuching on June 22 [2017]. Dr Noor Hisham said further investigation found that 2 of the victims had a history of being bitten by a dog about a month or 2 before manifestation of the symptoms while it could not be ascertained whether the 3rd victim was ever bitten by a dog. Dr Hilmi said the ministry also took several control and preventive measures, including conducting thorough investigation on the actual cause of the rabies outbreak in Serian. Asked on the latest development in the condition of the 3 infected children, he said until yesterday [Mon 3 Jul 2017] their condition was still critical and they were being treated and closely monitored by specialists at the Sarawak General Hospital. -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail [To comprehend the geographical situation addressed in the above items from Malaysia, in particular the proximity of Serian, in Sarawak (East Malaysia aka Malaysian Borneo) to West Kalamatan in Indonesian Borneo, please refer to the map at . An earlier media report, dated 1 Jul 2017, apparently preceding the death of 2 of the victims, included the following information: \"A total of 3 children including 2 siblings in Serian District, Sarawak have been infected with rabies. \"Health director-general Datuk Dr Noor Hisham Abdullah in a statement [Fri 30 Jun 2017] said the Health Ministry received a report from the Sarawak Health Department after being notified by the Sarawak General Hospital on June 22 [2017]. \"He said the victims aged 4, 6 and 7 years were initially thought to suffer from viral encephalitis and showed symptoms of fever, abnormal behavior and aggression at times, and were afraid of water. \"He said the children were warded at the intensive unit where 2 were put on oxygen. \"Further investigation found that 2 of the victims had a history of being bitten by a dog about a month or 2 before manifestation of the symptoms while it could not be ascertained whether the third victim was ever bitten by a dog, he said\". For the above information, published in  , we are indebted to Dr Tan Cheng Siang, Head, Centre for Tropical and Emerging Diseases, University Malaysia, Sarawak. Since the vector animal (suspected to be a rabid dog) is not known to have been detected/tested, and in view of the long time elapsed since the exposure (probably 2 months ago), the Malaysian authorities have a lot of work on their hands to detect any additional exposure and spread of the virus within the local animal populations. Their efforts are reflected in report [2] above, Malaysia is one of the few South-East-Asian countries which have managed to prevent the introduction of rabies for many years, though sporadic introductions have been recorded (most recent, in 1999 and 2014) on its continental (Peninsular Malaysia) borders with infected countries. The following chapter on Malaysia's rabies situation, included in the 2013 document \"The South\u2010East Asia Dog Rabies Elimination Strategy\" (available at  ) could be of interest to subscribers. \"An Animal Rabies Surveillance Programme was initiated by the Department of Veterinary Services in accordance with OIE standards in 1998 (OIE standards on rabies, which have been developed since then), but after an intensive campaign, no positive cases have been detected to date. With State and federal funding, Malaysia continues to implement initiatives that are relevant to rabies, including: annual dog licensing, annual rabies vaccination programme and animal movement control in the immune belt, management of dog bite cases, and a national surveillance programme. The efforts sustained have reportedly been supported by sufficient legislation at local and national levels. The Laws of Malaysia Act 647 (Animal Act of 1953) cover special provisions relating to dogs in connection with rabies. This includes licensing (Section 38), management of rabies\u2010infected areas (Section 39), destruction or detention of an animal suspected to be infected with rabies (Section 40), detention of any dogs that have bitten a person (Section 41) and anti\u2010rabies vaccination in dogs (Section 42)\". Laboratory confirmation of the human cases, and the virus' identification, are anticipated. - Mod.AS A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  .] [", "ANTHRAX - FRANCE (02): (MOSELLE) BOVINE *************************************** A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Sat 8 Jul 2017 Source: Radio Melodie [edited] By 2016, an episode of anthrax had affected the Moselle during the summer. Up to 8 outbreaks were detected and 32 cattle died of the bacteria . A vaccination campaign was undertaken during the summer in 15 communes to encourage breeders to protect animals grazing on the area as well as those fed with hay, wrapped silage, or any other type of silage in the area at risk. Following the refusal of the farmer , the animal which had just been infected had not been vaccinated while it was grazing in an at risk zone . Animal husbandry was observed while awaiting compulsory vaccination of animals. This episode recalls the need for pastoralists in areas historically affected by cases of anthrax, to vaccinate animals before putting them out to pasture and for those animals which will eat fodder,[silage, hay] harvested from fields with a history of anthrax. The vaccine can be obtained from veterinary surgeries for about 80 euros per 25 doses. Breeders can carry out preventive vaccinations themselves, as long as the livestock is not affected by the disease. [Byline: C\u00e9dric Kempf] -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail [France is in that difficult stage of truly sporadic anthrax and of persuading livestock owners to vaccinate their stock in areas perceived to be at risk. And it is the procrastinators that allow the disease to persist as their stock succumbs to infection. It takes much hard work by the regional veterinary staff to get the active attention and participation by their livestock owners. The spores are not immortal so the trick is to not replace the dying spores with fresh live ones from yet another outbreak. A total of 5 years without outbreaks is a good indicator that eradication is coming. Our thanks to Susan for the translation. - Mod.MHJ] [", "SALMONELLOSIS, SEROTYPE ENTERITIDIS - USA (02): (MICHIGAN) RAW EGGS ******************************************************************* A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Sat 8 Jul 2017 Source: Food Safety News [edited] Michigan officials are investigating an egg producer in connection with a salmonellosis outbreak linked to Hollandaise sauce made with unpasteurized raw eggs and served at an unidentified restaurant. Marquette County, MI health officials announced their investigation into the June 2017 outbreak of _Salmonella [enterica_ serotype] Enteritidis on Friday, 7 Jul 2017, but did not include any specific details. Instead, the news release from the Marquette County Health Department reminded the public that \"many foodborne illnesses increase during the warm summer months as people picnic and have outdoor family gatherings,\" and offered tips for avoiding food poisoning at such events. But the outbreak, which includes 4 confirmed victims and at least 4 probable victims, is linked to food served at a restaurant, said Patrick L. Jacuzzo, Marquette County director of environmental health. Jacuzzo described the outbreak as \"restaurant associated\" and said the assumption as of Friday [7 Jul 2017] afternoon was that raw, unpasteurized eggs served in Hollandaise sauce with eggs Benedict were the source. Six of the 8 victims dined at the restaurant, and 5 of them specifically recall eating the Hollandaise sauce. Three of the 4 lab-confirmed victims were among the restaurant diners. Jacuzzo said the 4 confirmed victims all had the same Pulsed-field gel electrophoresis (PFGE) pattern, meaning they were infected with the same strain of _Salmonella_. \"The Michigan Department of Agriculture is investigating the egg producer and testing their eggs, but the test results aren't back yet,\" Jacuzzo told Food Safety News on Friday, 7 Jul 2017. Jacuzzo did not volunteer the name of the egg producer or the name of the restaurant. He said the health department did not have access to any food samples served at the restaurant during the outbreak time frame to test. On Friday afternoon, 7 Jul 2017, officials at the state agriculture department were not immediately available for comment on the investigation. Anyone who has eaten Hollandaise sauce at any restaurant in Marquette County, MI and developed symptoms of salmonellosis should immediately seek medical attention and tell their doctor of the possible exposure so that the proper diagnostic tests can be performed. Symptoms may include vomiting, diarrhea, abdominal cramping and sometimes fever and usually develop 12 to 72 hours after infection, according to the CDC. [Byline: Coral Beach] -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts [Salmonellosis is often thought to be associated with cracked eggs or eggs dirty with fecal matter, a problem controlled by cleaning procedures implemented in the egg industry. It is clearly the case, however, that most of the salmonellosis outbreaks linked to eggs were associated with uncracked, disinfected grade A eggs, or foods containing such eggs. The undamaged eggs become contaminated during ovulation, and thus were contaminated with the bacteria before the egg shell was formed. To avoid this, uncooked eggs should only be used as an ingredient if pasteurized. Hollandaise sauce ( ) is an emulsion of egg yolk, liquid butter, water and lemon juice (or a white wine or vinegar reduction), whisked together over the low heat of a double boiler. Additional salt, white pepper and/or cayenne pepper is used for seasoning. Hollandaise is one of the 5 sauces in the French haute cuisine mother sauce repertoire. These types of sauces are considered \"mayonnaise sauces\" as they are, like mayonnaise, based on the emulsion of an oil in egg yolk. Hollandaise sauce is well known as a key ingredient of eggs Benedict, and is often paired with vegetables such as steamed asparagus. - Mod.LL A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  .] [", "EBOLA UPDATE (31): NEWS, VACCINES, RESEARCH, FUNDING **************************************************** A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases In this update: [1] News  - DR Congo outbreak over [2] Vaccines  - Genomic vaccines [3] Research  - Personal protective equipment  - Spillover [4] Funding  - World Bank ****** [1] News 7 Jul 2017 Ebola Outbreak Officially Over in DRC [On 2 Jul 2017, the World Health Organization (WHO) officially declared that the recent Ebola outbreak that has plagued the Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC), was over. The last confirmed case of Ebola tested negative for the disease 47 days ago. The outbreak, which was confirmed to have infected 8 individuals, 4 of whom died, also impacted the lives of 583 contacts of those infected. These individuals, \"were registered and closely monitored, but no known contacts developed signs or symptoms of Ebola virus disease,\" according to a press release from WHO. WHO was 1st notified of the outbreak by Ministry of Public Health in the DRC after a \"cluster of undiagnosed illnesses and deaths with hemorrhagic signs in the Likati Health Zone,\" according to the release. The 2017 outbreak marked the 8th outbreak of the virus in the DRC since 1976. WHO then notified the public of the first case with a tweet: On 11 May 2017, the Min of Health of the Democratic Republic of the Congo notified WHO and partners of a lab-confirmed case of #Ebola#DRC Officials believe that the outbreak was able to remain effectively contained due to not only the remote location of those infected, but also \"the timely alert by local authorities of suspect cases, immediate testing of blood samples due to strengthened national laboratory capacity, the early announcement of the outbreak by the government, rapid response activities by local and national health authorities with the robust support of international partners, and speedy access to flexible funding,\" according to the release. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) also commended the efforts put forth by WHO and its partners, stating in an official media statement that, \"The CDC commends the dedicated efforts of those in the DRC whose hard work and commitment stopped the most recent Ebola Virus Disease (EVD) outbreak in Africa in less than 2 months. This highlights what is possible when countries are prepared to prevent, detect, and respond to disease outbreaks.\" A total of 9 disease detectives from the CDC contributed to the control of the outbreak in the DRC. WHO Director-General, Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus, MD, is quoted in the release as stating, \"With the end of this epidemic, DRC has once again proved to the world that we can control the very deadly Ebola virus if we respond early in a coordinated and efficient way.\" According to the WHO press release, \"enhanced surveillance in the country will continue, as well as strengthening of preparedness and readiness for Ebola outbreaks.\" In addition, WHO will continue to work with partners and local officials to ensure that all of those affected by the outbreak continue to have access to medical care (including psycho social care), and that they receive education on how to successfully integrate back into their family and community to reduce the risk of further transmission and the stigma carried by the disease. [The world health community learns from each new outbreak, strengthening the response to the next one. One hopes even if the next outbreak is not in a remote region, response will be rapid and well informed. - Mod.LK] ****** [2] Vaccine 29 Jun 2017: The New Vaccines [Genomic vaccines are poised to make a splash, writes Geoffrey Ling from the Uniformed Services University of Health Science and Johns Hopkins University at Scientific American. \"Genomic vaccines promise to offer many advantages, including fast manufacture when a virus, such as Zika or Ebola, suddenly becomes more virulent or widespread,\" Ling says. Rather than being made up of weakened or killed viruses or their antigens, genomic vaccines include DNA or RNA that encode proteins, Ling says. Then the cells of the person receiving the vaccine make the proteins. At the same time, Ling says that genomics is also enabling a different kind of vaccine called a passive immune transfer. In that, gene sequences encoding antibodies -- identified from resistant people -- are given to patients rather than antigens. A number of clinical trials testing safety and immunogenicity are ongoing for bird flu, HIV, Ebola, and more, he says.] [DNA vaccines have the advantages stated above, and in addition, they do not revert, they can be generated in large volumes at a lower cost than most live attenuated or killed vaccines, and DNA vaccines are also easier to transport as theoretically, a cold chain does not need to be maintained. However, problems still exist such as whether the protein the recipient makes is immunogenic. There is also the issue of the vector, against which the immune response might be directed in error. - Mod.LK] ****** [3] Research 29 Jun 2017: Ebola: Challenge of Liquid Stressed Protective Materials and Environmental Persistence [Citation. Nikiforuk A.M., Cutts T.A., Theriault S.S., et al. (29 Jun 2017). : Challenge of Liquid Stressed Protective Materials and Environmental Persistence. Nature,Scientific Reports 7, Article number: 4388 (2017). doi:10.1038/s41598-017-04137-2 Excerpt. The possible penetration of Ebola virus through liquid stressed (saturated) PPE [personal protective equipment] should impact future concepts and strategies of infection prevention and control in tropical environments. The negative impacts of saturation on the protection afforded by PPE should be considered and mitigated. PPE could either be re-designed for increased temperature transfer/gaseous exchange to reduce perspiration or to offer more complete protection. The use of powered air purifying respirators should be discussed as they provide air circulation and liquid impermeable shielding to the wearer's face. The face is considered the most vulnerable region of the body to Ebola virus infection due to mucosal membranes of the eyes, nose and mouth. Even the use of highly protective PPE does not guarantee safety of HCWs [health care workers] or others exposed to Ebola virus because user error (i.e. improper donning/doffing or use of the equipment) may lead to exposure or heighten exposure risk. - ...more] [Decreasing risk of infection of health care workers [HCW] is essential to their safety as well as the safety of the patients they are treating, thus studies such as this one are important. Because HCW are on the front line of treatment, the factors contributing to their high incidence of infection are likely multifactorial, including temperature of the working environment, material makeup and design of the PPE, among others - Mod.LK]. 5 Jul 2017 Ebola spillover events [Citation. Wollenberg Valero K.C., Isokpehi R., Douglas N.E., et al. (5 Jul 2017). Phenology supports the eco-environmental hypothesis for Ebola spillover events. bioRxiv Abstract. Ebola virus disease outbreaks in mammals (including humans and great apes) start with sporadic host switches from unknown reservoir species. The factors leading to such spillover events are not clearly understood. Filoviridae have a wide range of natural hosts and are unstable once outside hosts. Spillover events, which involve the physical transfer of viral particles across species, could therefore be directly promoted by conditions of host ecology and environment. In this report we outline a proof of concept that temporal fluctuations of a set of eco-environmental variables describing the dynamics of the host ecosystem are able to predict such events of Ebola virus spillover to humans and animals. We newly compiled a dataset of climate and phenology variables and Ebola virus disease spillovers in humans and animals. We identified critical biotic and abiotic conditions for spillovers via multiple regression and neural-networks-based time series regression. Phenology variables proved to be overall better predictors than climate variables. African phenology variables are not yet available as a comprehensive online resource. Given the likely importance of phenology for forecasting the likelihood of future Ebola spillover events, our results highlight the need for more phenology monitoring to supply data for predictive modelling efforts.] Funding ------- 28 Jun 2017 World Bank launches pandemic bond to tackle major disease outbreaks [The World Bank has launched a \"pandemic bond\" to support an emergency financing facility intended to release money quickly to fight a major health crisis like the 2014 Ebola outbreak. The catastrophe bond, which will pay out depending on the size of the outbreak, its growth rate and the number of countries affected, is the 1st of its kind for epidemics. It should mean money is disbursed much faster than during West Africa's crisis. [Ebola virus disease] spread across the region in the early months of 2014. Michael Bennett, head of derivatives and structured finance at the World Bank's capital markets department, said that if the pandemic emergency financing facility (PEF) had existed in 2014, some USD 100 million could have been mobilized as early as [July 2017]. In reality, money did not begin to flow on this scale until 3 months later, by which time the number of deaths from [EVD] had increased tenfold. \"In the end about 11 000 people died in that pandemic and it's estimated that the cost to the countries most affected - Guinea, Liberia and Sierre Leone - was about USD 2.8 billion,\" Bennett said. The PEF will offer coverage to all countries eligible for financing from the International Development Agency (IDA), the arm of the World Bank dedicated to the world's poorest countries. It covers outbreaks of infectious diseases most likely to cause major epidemics, including pandemic influenza strains; coronaviruses, including SARS; filoviruses, which include Ebola and Marburg; plus others such as Crimean Congo fever, Rift Valley fever and Lassa fever. Bennett said the PEF as a whole would provide more than USD 500 million of coverage against pandemics over the next 5 years. This includes today's USD 425 million transaction, comprising USD 320 million raised through the bond market and USD 105 million through swaps transactions. ...-more] [This is an excellent idea, but it is regrettable it took 11 000 deaths to initiate it. - Mod.LK] 6 Jul 2017 Editorial on World Bank [Opinion : A worthy legacy of the Ebola catastrophe One of the most disturbing lessons to emerge from the Ebola virus disease epidemic in West Africa in 2014-2015 was how unprepared the world was for it. David Nabarro, special adviser to the U.N. secretary general, told a Senate panel recently that the virus was missed in late 2013 and played down in 2014, even in July of that year when numbers of cases were doubling every 3 weeks. Ultimately, 11 314 people died in Guinea, Liberia and Sierra Leone. When it was over, several studies concluded that the world needs a well-funded, rapid-reaction mechanism, a firefighting team ready to deploy quickly in the face of spreading disease. The World Health Organization proposed a USD 100 million contingency fund but so far has raised only USD 31.5 million, Mr Nabarro said. \"In multilateral work, funding is oxygen,\" he added. \"When it comes to responding to outbreaks, WHO is starved of oxygen.\" Now comes the World Bank with a novel program that could help realize the goal of rapid response to such emergency health threats and save lives. The bank has announced the issuance of USD 500 million in specialized bonds and derivatives that will help poor countries cope with a pandemic such as Ebola. The effort will create a trust fund, the Pandemic Emergency Financing Facility that can be quickly deployed for pandemic response, complementing the WHO fund. Investors who buy the bonds and provide the trust-fund financing upfront will reap premiums (at first, Japan and Germany are covering the premiums) but will also be taking a risk. If there is a major outbreak, the investors will lose some or all of their cash. This is the 1st time such an approach has been tried for pandemic risk, but a similar idea underlies insurance against other natural disasters and catastrophes. One big advantage is that instead of waiting around for slow-moving national governments to fund a disease response, the resources necessary for saving lives will be available quickly, when they can do the most good. The trust-fund money will be used to respond to 6 viruses that are most likely to cause a pandemic, including influenza, Ebola, severe acute respiratory syndrome and Middle East respiratory syndrome. The financing to 77 eligible countries will be triggered depending on how far and fast a disease spreads and whether it crosses international borders] [Submitted by Rapporteur Mary Marshall mjm2020@googlemail.com] Compiled by Celeste Whitlow -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail [A map of the DR Congo can be seen at  and a HealthMap/ProMED-mail map of the DRC at  . Maps of the 3 countries affected by the 2014 Ebola outbreak in W. Africa can be accessed at: Liberia Guinea ] [", "CHOLERA, DIARRHEA AND DYSENTERY UPDATE (69): ASIA (YEMEN) ********************************************************* A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Sat 8 Jul 2017 Source: WHO [edited] Highlights: >From 27 Apr to 7 Jul 2017, 297 438 suspected cholera cases and 1706 deaths (CFR: 0.6%) have been reported in 95.6% (22/23) of Yemen governorates, and 86.5% (288/333) of the districts. Geographical distribution of cases: The 4 most affected governorates were Amanat Al Asimah, Al Hudaydah, Hajjah and Amran, with 47.3% (140 750/297 438) of the cases reported since 27 Apr 2017. Amran, Al Dhaele'e and Al Mahwit governorates had the highest attack rates (3/1000) (20.5, 20.1 and 19.6, respectively), and Raymah, Hajjah and Ibb governorates the highest case fatality ratios (1.4%, 1.0% and 1.0% respectively). Number of suspected cholera cases & deaths, AR and CFR by governorate, Yemen, 27 Apr-7 Jul 2017 ------------------------------------------- Governorates / Cases / Deaths / CFR (%) / Attack Rate (#/1000) Amanat Al Asimah / 40 840 / 54 / 0.1 / 12.3 Al-Hudaydah / 36 379 / 196 / 0.5 / 10.9 Hajjah / 31 907 / 325 / 1.0 / 14.4 Amran / 31 424 / 147 / 0.5 / 20.5 Sana'a / 23 261 / 110 / 0.5 / 18.6 Ibb / 23 129 / 225 / 1.0 / 7.5 Taizz / 21 836 / 146 / 0.7 / 7.2 Dhamar / 18 840 / 113 / 0.6 / 8.9 Al Dhale'e / 15 166 / 70 / 0.5 / 20.1 Al Mahwit / 14 921 / 108 / 0.7 / 19.6 Al Bayda / 9028 / 24 / 0.3 / 11.7 Aden / 8948 / 48 / 0.5 / 9.4 Abyan / 7582 / 27 / 0.4 / 12.4 Raymah / 5534 / 78 / 1.4 / 8.7 Lahj / 4072 / 16 / 0.4 / 3.9 Al Jawf / 2209 / 13 / 0.6 / 3.4 Ma'areb / 1335 / 4 / 0.3 / 3.7 Sa'ada / 477 / 1 / 0.2 / 0.5 Al Mahrah / 355 / 1 / 0.3 / 2.2 Shabwah / 189 / - / - / 0.3 Say'on / 4 / - / - / 0.0 Moklla / 2 / - / - / 0.0 ------ Total / 297 438 / 1 706 / 0.6 / 10.0 Al Hali (Al Hudaydah gov., 12 363 cases, 22 deaths), Bani Al Harith (Amanat Al Asimah gov., 8095 cases, 10 deaths), Ma'ain (Amanat Al Asimah gov., 7 850, 7 deaths) and As Sabain (Amanat Al Asimah gov., 6149 cases, 9 deaths) were still the 4 most affected districts. -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail [Date (2017) / Cases / Deaths 8 May / 1360 / 25 11 May / 2752 / 51 13 May / 8595 / 115 14 May / 11 000 / 180 17 May / 17 200 / 209 19 May / 23 500 / 242 21 May / 29 300 / 315 22 May / 35 217 / 361 24 May / 42 207 / 420 27 May / 51 832 / 471 30 May / 65 300 / 532 2 Jun / 73 700 / 605 4 Jun / 86 400 / 676 5 Jun / 91 400 / 728 6 Jun / 96 000 / 746 7 Jun / 101 820 / 789 10 Jun / 116 700 / 869 12 Jun / 124 002 / 923 14 Jun / 140 116 / 989 16 Jun / 151 000 / 1054 19 Jun / 166 976 / 1146 21 Jun / 179 548 / 1205 23 Jun / 200 000 / 1310 26 Jun / 219 000 / 1400 28 Jun / 231 364 / 1439 30 Jun / 240 000 / 1500 04 Jul / 275 987 / 1634 07 Jul 297 438 / 1706 The governorates of Yemen can be found on the map at  . - Mod.LL A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  .] [", "HEARTLAND VIRUS - USA: (ARKANSAS) ********************************* A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Fri 7 Jul 2017 Source: THV 11 [edited] Arkansas has identified its 1st case of Heartland virus [infection], a relatively new tick-borne disease, in an individual living in the northwest part of the state. People become infected with Heartland virus through the bite of the lone star tick [_Amblyomma americanum_]. Patients are most likely to be diagnosed with Heartland virus [infections] from May to September. Heartland virus causes a flu-like illness, including fever, headache, muscle aches, diarrhea, appetite loss, and feeling very tired. Most cases have low numbers of cells that fight infection and low numbers of cells that help blood clot. There is no vaccine or drug to prevent or treat the disease. \"It's a flu-like illness where you're stiff, you're achy, you run a fever, you've got headaches; this one often has diarrhea, which isn't always the case with some of the others, and loss of appetite,\" said Dr. Sue Weinstein, the state public health veterinarian. \"It can get quite serious. A lot of patients with this are hospitalized, but most recover. There's only been one death in the nation, and that was in someone who was quite elderly and [had] other medical issues at the time.\" In 2009, 2 people admitted to Heartland Hospital in Missouri were later found to be infected with this virus. Both recovered, but the Missouri Department of Health and Senior Services began working with the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) to learn more about the virus. To date, more than 20 cases of Heartland virus disease have been identified in several states in Southeast and South Central United States, so it is not surprising that Arkansas has a case. Most patients require hospitalization for their illness but fully recover. One patient has died. The Arkansas patient has recovered fully. Arkansas has some of the highest rates in the nation for tick-borne diseases such as Rocky Mountain spotted fever (RMSF), ehrlichiosis, and tularemia. Anaplasmosis and Lyme disease may also occur. People who work or do activities outside where they are exposed to ticks or insects are more likely to be infected. Preventing bites from ticks and mosquitoes is the best way to prevent these and other infections: - Use insect repellents. - Wear long sleeves and pants. - Avoid bushy and wooded areas. - Perform thorough tick checks after spending time outdoors. -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts [The above report provides a good historical summary of the occurrence of Heartland virus in the USA. Heartland virus is a tick-borne phlebovirus belonging to the Bunyaviridae family. A variety of wild mammals may serve as hosts of the virus. A team at the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention found signs that Heartland virus is circulating in deer, raccoons, coyotes and moose in 13 states, from Texas to North Carolina and Florida to Maine. In that study, serum of 1428 animals was tested, and 103 were seropositive, including 55 deer, 33 raccoons, 11 coyotes, and 4 moose. Another study found antibodies against virus nucleoproteins in 10-18 percent of samples from cattle, sheep, goats, deer, and elk in 24 Minnesota counties. These studies do not prove that these species are capable of infecting ticks, but it does indicate that there was enough virus replication to elicit an antibody response. Maps showing the geographic distribution of Heartland virus are accessible: at  . - Mod.TY HealthMap/ProMED-mail maps can be accessed at:  ,  .] [", "BOURBON VIRUS - USA (02): (MISSOURI) ************************************ A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Fri 7 Jul 2017 Source: Missourian [edited] The daughter of a 58-year-old woman from Sullivan has confirmed that her mother died from complications relating to the Bourbon virus [infection] contracted by a tick bite. The woman was the assistant park superintendent at Meramec State Park in Sullivan. She had lived and worked in the park for 10 years. Her daughter, who is a registered nurse, said the cause of death is listed as respiratory failure, but she feels it was brought on by the tick-borne virus. She died on 23 Jun [2017] after spending 24 days in Barnes Hospital, St. Louis. Despite testing positive for the virus twice at Barnes [hospital], the family is still awaiting official confirmation from the Centers for Disease Control (CDC) that the Bourbon virus lead to her death. \"We haven't heard anything from anybody,\" the daughter said. \"When she went into the hospital on 31 May [2017], she didn't have any lung problems. Then she died because she couldn't breathe.\" She added that her mother was active and didn't have any other health problems before being bitten by a tick around Memorial Day weekend. \"This came out of nowhere,\" she said. \"I was at her house on Mother's Day; 2 weeks later, she was in the hospital, and we were wondering if we were going to lose our mom.\" The daughter said 2 seed ticks were removed from her mother's hip shortly after the Memorial Day weekend. Shortly after, the mother became ill and visited her primary care doctor in Sullivan, who diagnosed her with a urinary tract infection and prescribed antibiotics. \"Two or 3 days later, she wasn't feeling any better,\" the daughter said. \"They ran her blood and found her platelets and white blood cell count was low and sent her straight to Barnes [hospital] on 31 May [2017],\" where she was immediately admitted and told the doctors she had been bitten by a tick. \"The infectious disease doctors told us they were going to run everything,\" the daughter said. \"She developed a light rash, mostly on her extremities at 1st, then it got much worse.\" The doctors at 1st thought her mother had Rocky Mountain spotted fever or Heartland virus, and they were going to send some of her blood to the CDC for further testing. [On \"11 Jun [2017], the results came back, and she tested positive for Bourbon virus,\" the daughter said. \"They told us they didn't know much about the virus and were learning off the internet just like we were. They told us it basically attacks your organs.\" Soon after, the patient began to have complications with her bone marrow, liver, lungs, and the rash became so bad she couldn't talk, eat or even swallow. She had abnormal enzymes and was diagnosed with pneumonia, and, just before she died, doctors began treating her for hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis (HLH), a life-threatening immunodeficiency related to white blood cell irregularities. A 2nd test for Bourbon virus came back positive [on] 22 Jun [2017], just hours before she died. On Mon 26 Jun 2017, staff from the CDC and county health department began a systematic effort to trap and collect ticks at Meramec State Park. Following the collection process, the agencies began testing the ticks for any kind of tick-borne illness [pathogen]. The Missouri Department of Health and Senior Services (DHSS) is expected to release the tick testing results when they are received from the CDC. Meramec State Park and all of its facilities remain open for regular operations. This is only the 5th confirmed case of Bourbon virus [infection] since it was 1st discovered in 2014. [Byline: Monte Miller] -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts [This report provides additional details for this case that was originally published on 30 Jun 2017 (see Bourbon virus - USA: (MO) tick-borne case http://promedmail.org/post/20170703.5147985). Mod.LK provided an informative comment and reference citation in that post: \"Bourbon virus is a member of the _Thogotovirus_ genus of enveloped RNA viruses, one of 7 genera in the virus family _Orthomyxoviridae_. Their single-stranded, negative-sense RNA genome has 6 or 7 segments. Several related viruses have been identified in hard tick species; while it is unknown how Bourbon virus is transmitted, it is also assumed to be tick-borne because of seasonality of the disease and association with tick bites. As of 27 Jun 2017, a limited number of Bourbon virus disease cases have been identified in the Midwest and southern United States. Some people who have been infected later died. At this time, it is not known whether the virus might be found in other areas of the United States. There is no information provided on the status of this newest patient and what [her] symptoms were [these now are presented above]. In general, the symptoms have been non-specific, including fever, tiredness, rash, headache, other body aches, nausea, and vomiting. They also had low blood counts for cells that fight infection and help prevent bleeding. Bourbon virus should be included in the differential diagnoses when a patient presents with history of a tick bite and fever, leukopenia, and thrombocytopenia, and who does not respond to antibiotics. Reference: Kosoy OI, Lambert AJ, Pastula DM et al. Novel Thogotovirus Associated with Febrile Illness and Death, United States, 2014. Emerg Infect Dis. 2015; 21(5):760-4. doi: 10.3201/eid2105.150150 (available at: . - Mod.ML\" Although rare, Bourbon virus is capable of causing serious, even fatal, disease. It will be interesting to learn which ticks transmit the virus and which wildlife species are the reservoirs. - Mod.TY HealthMap/ProMED-mail maps can be accessed at:  ,  .] [", "HANTAVIRUS - AMERICAS (39): PANAMA (LOS SANTOS) *********************************************** A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Sat 8 Jul 2017 Source: Cr\u00edtica [in Spanish, trans. Mod.TY, edited] A case of fever due to [a] hantavirus [infection] has been registered in Los Santos [province], specifically in Santa Isabel in Las Tablas. The case is a 30-year-old woman who was admitted to the Joaquin Franco hospital in Las Tablas with signs of the virus [infection], and the test done was positive for the fever [virus]. To date, there are 4 cases of this fever and 2 with hantavirus cardiopulmonary syndrome. [Byline: Zenaida V\u00e1squez] -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts [Los Santos province is endemic for the hantavirus that can cause hantavirus cardiopulmonary syndrome (HPS). HPS is a serious disease and can develop quickly, with a case fatality rate of around 30 percent. This report does not give any details about the circumstances that led to the infections or specify the hantavirus involved in this case. As noted in comments on previous cases, Los Santos and adjoining provinces are endemic for Choclo hantavirus. Although no data on these or the previous cases in earlier years include an indication of which hantavirus is responsible, Choclo is the only one of the 3 hantaviruses known to be endemic in Panama that causes HPS. In the report above, no mention is made of the ecological setting in which the infection occurred. The croplands and food sources of the area, such as stored grain, attract the rodent host of Choclo virus. The preventive measures indicated in previous reports included elimination of sites attractive to rodents. No vaccine is available for Choclo virus. The rodent host of Choclo virus is the pygmy rice rat (_Oligoryzomys fulvescens_), a photograph of which can be accessed at  . These rodents occur in and around agricultural areas and adjacent houses and buildings. Maps of Panama can be accessed at  and  . - Mod.TY A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  .] [", "SCRUB TYPHUS - NEPAL (06): (GULMI, NUWAKOT) ******************************************* A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Sun 9 Jul 2017 From: Anup Bastola [edited] In the last 2 weeks, 2 cases were diagnosed with scrub typhus at Sukraraj Tropical and Infectious Disease Hospital among admitted cases. The 1st case, a 23-year-old male from Gulmi (province 5), was admitted with acute undifferentiated fever for 5 days and diagnosed with scrub typhus; [he] fully recovered with docycycline. The 2nd case, a 40-year-old female, was admitted last week with acute febrile illness for 8 days from Kumari, Nuwakot (province 3) and diagnosed with scrub typhus. She also recovered fully with doxycycline. Numbers are expected to increase in the coming days. There have been no fatalities reported this season due to scrub typhus. -- Dr Anup Bastola, MD, MCTM Sukraraj Tropical and Infectious Disease Hospital Kathmandu, Nepal [ProMED-mail thanks Dr. Bastola for the update. Maps of Nepal showing the locations of regions and districts, including Gulmi and Nuwakot, can be seen at  , and the ProMED HealthMap of Nepal at . - Mod.ML] [", "NOVEL PESTIVIRUS, SWINE - AUSTRIA: (STYRIA) ******************************************* A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: July 2017 [ahead of print] Source: Emerg Infect Dis. [edited] Reference: Lamp B, Schwarz L, H\u00f6gler S, Riedel C, Sinn L, Rebel-Bauder B, et al. Novel Pestivirus Species in Pigs, Austria, 2015. Abstract A novel pestivirus species was discovered in a piglet-producing farm in Austria during virologic examinations of congenital tremor cases. The emergence of this novel pestivirus species, provisionally termed Linda virus, in domestic pigs may have implications for classical swine fever virus surveillance and porcine health management. [Background] The genus Pestivirus consists of 4 approved species within the family Flaviviridae. Besides bovine viral diarrhea virus 1 (BVDV-1), BVDV-2, border disease virus (BDV), and classical swine fever virus (CSFV), several unassigned strains and tentative species are represented by the so-called atypical pestivirus strains. An atypical pestivirus of swine emerged in 2003 in a commercial pig-breeding farm in Australia and was later termed Bungowannah virus (BV). This well-studied virus caused reproductive disorders, stillbirth, and sudden death in piglets, resulting in the loss of around 50 000 animals in the 2 affected farms. Because of its marked pathogenicity, BV was considered a threat to global pig health, but this virus or relatives were never found at other location. Recently, a novel group of porcine pestiviruses, termed atypical porcine pestiviruses (APPVs), was discovered. These viruses were identified in North America (3,4) and subsequently detected in Europe. There is strong evidence that APPVs are a causative agent behind the type A-II congenital tremor (CT A-II) syndrome of piglets (4). CT A-II is characterized by a generalized shaking of the whole body associated with variable degrees of hypomyelination in the brain and spinal cord. However, hypomyelination is also apparent in the brains of fetuses of sheep, cattle, and pigs after late-gestation state infection with BDV, BVDV, or CSFV. We report results of an investigation of CT in piglets on a farm in southeastern Austria in which a novel pestivirus species was discovered. The Study A small-scale piglet-producing farm in Styria, in southeastern Austria, reported major piglet losses from CT in January 2015. Animals from this farm were examined and samples were taken by authorized veterinarians. The CT-affected piglets showed a severe lateral shaking and were often incapable of sucking milk, which led to elevated preweaning death rates. The prevalence of CT varied from 20-100 percent within the affected litters. Litters affected by CT were not used for the production of replacement gilts. The outbreak of CT abruptly stopped in July 2015, when all sows had produced 1 CT-affected litter. Only 22.4 piglets per sow were weaned in that year, compared with an average of 25.8 piglets/sow/year before CT symptoms occurred. Pathological examinations were performed as described previously, confirming the presence of typical CT A-II lesions. Conclusions A previously unknown pestiviral agent was found in CT-affected piglets on a farm in Austria. We observed a severe hypomyelination in the entire white matter of the spinal cord and detected pestivirus antigen in the brain of the CT-affected piglets, suggesting a causal relationship between infection and lesions. Analyses of the assembled genome allowed an unambiguous assignment of LV within the genus Pestivirus with regard to the presence of pestivirus-specific genes (Npro and Erns) and sequence homology to other pestiviruses. In contrast to APPV, which hardly infects cultured cells at all, LV could be easily propagated on porcine cell lines without the need for adaptation, similar to what has been reported for BV. We suggest that LV likely shares a common ancestor with BV. After its description around 10 years ago, BV was intensively sought worldwide, but the virus has never been detected outside Australia. The broad cell culture tropism of BV led to the hypothesis that the virus recently jumped from another species to porcine hosts. The discovery of a related pestivirus with substantial sequence divergence in swine on a different continent suggests that both viruses probably have a porcine origin. The identification of the cross-reacting E2-specific monoclonal antibody 6A5 indicates that a cross-reactivity to related pestiviral proteins exists, which might interfere with the serologic testing for CSFV. Further work is needed to investigate the prevalence and the epidemiology of LV in Europe and to assess its virulence in controlled animal experiments. -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail [It is nice to see the thorough characterization of this atypical swine pestivirus and a description of its pathogenicity. This virus presents a potential significant threat to swine production in Austria and beyond. One assumes that this virus and the disease it causes will be included in swine health surveillance in Austria and other European countries. Readers interested in the details are urged to see the entire report and the video it contains. Interestingly, in 2015, a veterinarian described tremors due to infection with a novel swine pestivirus as similar to those seen with Parkinson's disease in humans, but more severe. The Kansas State University Veterinary Diagnostic Laboratory identified and characterized a proposed new species of pestivirus, named atypical porcine pestivirus or APPV. It was identified through metagenomic sequencing of swine serum samples submitted to the diagnostic lab. Reference Hause BM, Collin EA, Peddireddi L, et al: Discovery of a novel putative atypical porcine pestivirus in pigs in the USA. J Gen Virol. 2015; 96(10): 2994-8. doi: 10.1099/jgv.0.000251; abstract available at  . A map showing the location of Styria state in Austria can be accessed at: and A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map of Austria at:  . - Mod.TY The search for the etiologic agent(s) of porcine congenital tremors continues to lead to the discovery of previously unknown agents. While congenital tremors may mimic the clinical signs of Parkinson's disease, the immediate onset after birth and association with early parity sows has suggested an in utero agent(s) was(were) the inciting cause. Although congenital tremors have deleterious effects on individual litters or farrowing groups on some swine farms often requiring euthanasia of the affected piglets, the relative rarity of the condition compared to other diseases in swine production makes it unlikely any of the agents will be widely tested for outside of affected herds. However, if one of more of the agents in question are found to interfere with testing for agents like CSFV as has been suggested for Linda virus, it may necessitate the development of a rapid differential field test given the on-going spread of CSFV into Europe and the ongoing eradication efforts in several European countries. Cross-reactivity would also have international trade consequences that could severely affect export markets so clearly being able to differentiate CSFV from the atypical porcine pestiviruses will be critical for certain nations and may necessitate changes in screening procedures used at ports of entry for pork products. - Mod.JH I would point to the apparent resemblance of the clinical signs (video) to Border disease (Hairy Shaker) in lambs. - Mod.AS] [", "ANAPLASMOSIS - USA: (NEW YORK) ****************************** A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Sat 8 Jul 2017 Source: WAMC [edited] A tick-borne illness is becoming more prevalent in Rensselaer County [New York State]. NewsChannel 13 reported that 8 cases of anaplasmosis were reported Friday morning [7 Jul 2017] alone, and more than 100 cases have been reported in the county since May [2017]. In June [2017], the Rensselaer County health department issued an alert about the bacterial infection. Symptoms of the disease include headache, fever, chills, muscle aches, and weakness. Some individuals may experience confusion, nausea, vomiting and joint pain. Symptoms appear one to 2 weeks after the bite of an infected tick. U.S. Senator Richard Blumenthal, a Democrat from Connecticut, is calling on Health and Human Services Secretary Tom Price to update the country on efforts to establish a Tick-Born Disease Working Group. Blumenthal says it's required by the 21st Century Cures Act. [Byline: Lucas Willard] -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts [For a discussion of anaplasmosis, see my moderator comments in the prior ProMED-mail post \"Anaplasmosis - USA: (ME) increased incidence http://promedmail.org/post/20120811.1239966.\" Rensselaer County, with a population of 159 429 residents, is located in the U.S. state of New York; its county seat is the city of Troy, and it is part of the Albany-Schenectady-Troy, NY Metropolitan Statistical Area and the New York State Capital District ( ). - Mod.ML A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  .] [", "CHLAMYDIA, LIVESTOCK - AUSTRALIA ******************************** A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Tue 4 Jul 2017 Source: Brisbane Times [edited] With chlamydia \"highly prevalent\" in Australian sheep, a Sunshine Coast researcher hopes to find a way to better spot infections of the painful disease. University of Sunshine Coast Associate Professor Adam Polkinghorne kicked off his chlamydia research with koalas and after a trip to Europe, discovered the disease was common in other species. The molecular microbiologist will use a $593 000 [USD 450 668] grant to better detect the disease. \"It turns out sheep and cattle have lots of chlamydia in Australia,\" he said. \"In fact, one study done by group in Western Australia revealed that 30 percent of Australian sheep are carrying the same chlamydia that is causing disease in koalas, it is the same species. We found that chlamydia was highly prevalent in Australian sheep and it can cause some pretty important diseases that can cause economic losses for farmers.\" Unlike koalas and humans, chlamydia in sheep is not a sexually transmitted disease, but transferred through the animals' droppings. \"It is a gastro-intestinal tract disease so it is transmitted in the faeces and then typically re-enters the gastrointestinal tract when it is swallowed,\" he said. \"In the animal world that is pretty common.\" \"Lots of animals are infected, you can have 30-40 percent of animals on the farms that are shedding chlamydia ... and that means you get huge amounts of bacteria spread out onto a farm which makes it really difficult to control.\" Associate Professor Polkinghorne said the prevalence of chlamydia in sheep, with effects including pneumonia, abortion and arthritis in lambs, was likely under-represented. \"It is not one of the major ones that people typically think of but the more work we do, the more we realise it is more common than we thought. It is causing more economic loss than anyone realises,\" he said. \"The most important of these caused by chlamydia in sheep is arthritis, which is not typically a disease you would think about in chlamydia. \"Arthritis in lambs means it slows their growth and means they don't put on as much weight as other lambs so when they get sent to the abattoir those lambs that are affected are either condemned or they don't weigh as much as healthy lambs. That is where the cost comes to farmers. \"It is also a really painful disease, the animals suffer.\" He said the $293 000 [USD 222 674] grant from the Australian Research Council, along with an additional $300 000 [USD 227 994] from industry funding, would hopefully go towards developing ways to detect the infections in sheep. \"The tests for chlamydia are blood tests where we look for antibodies sheep make against chlamydia,\" he said. \"The problem is those tests are not very sensitive and can't differentiate between the different chlamydia species. \"Our test ... will be able to distinguish between different chlamydia pathogens thereby improving diagnosis but also the health report cards we give for animals when we export them.\" He said better diagnosis would lead to better treatment. \"With that same test we should be able to give a more accurate diagnosis for our veterinarians, which means farmers will get better information about when they should treat lambs for chlamydia as well,\" he said. \"Once we know more about how much of a problem it is, we have a few options - one exciting option is the use of a vaccine we have been developing in koalas. \"We have a prototype koala chlamydia vaccine and over the next 12 months we will be starting to test whether that vaccine could also be effective in lambs as well.\" Field work for the research will be conducted in New South Wales and analysed at USC's research lab at Sippy Downs. The project will be collaboration between Associate Professor Polkinghorne, researchers from New South Wales and Tasmania and industry partners. [Byline: Amy Mitchell-Whittington] -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail [The taxonomy for the bacterial genus Chlamydia has been evolving over the last decade or more. It now consists of a Genus, Chlamydia and 9 different species, and some documents say as many as 11 different species (abortus, caviae, felis, muridarum, pecorum, pneumoniae, psittaci, suis, and trachomatis: and 2 recently discovered, possibly making 11. Those 2 are: avium and gallinacea). These species vary in their effect on the primary host animals from abortion, conjunctivitis, urogenital infections, some involve the respiratory system and some affect multiple body systems. Several of these species can be transmitted from animals to people and some from people to animals. So it is both a zoonotic and a reverse zoonotic disease. This genus infects a large number of different species of animals, including cattle, birds, cats and humans, to name only a few. In addition to affecting multiple species of animals, these bacteria affect multiple organ systems within the body. Thus, they may produce a variety of clinical manifestations, from acute to chronic or even a subclinical. Aerosol transmission of these pathogens is one of the main infectious routes. The reproductive tract may be another major route of infection. PCR and ELISA test are available for detection of most of these organisms. Several antimicrobials are available to fight the infection. However, resistance to some particular antibiotic is possible as clearing the disease in some animals may prove difficult. Vaccination is available for limited species, but is most effective where there is a vaccine available. It stands to reason that Koala's may get this disease, as many animal species are susceptible to this bacterial genus. - Mod.TG A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  .] [", "RABIES (30): MALAYSIA (SARAWAK) ******************************* A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Sat 8 Jul 2017 Source: The Star [edited] Another child from Serian has been admitted to the Sarawak General Hospital (SGH) for treatment for suspected rabies infection, bringing the total number of cases to 4. Women, Family and Community Development Minister Datuk Seri Rohani Abdul Karim said the hospital was, however, still awaiting test results to confirm whether the young victim is infected with rabies. She did not disclose the identity and age of the child, although she confirmed that the victim had come from one of the affected villages in Serian. \"The victim is currently under observation at the ICU together with a 7-year-old girl who was confirmed to have rabies infection. The doctors are still waiting for test reports before they can confirm whether the new victim has rabies,\" Rohani told reporters here Saturday [8 Jul 2017]. She added that the health condition of the 7-year-old victim from Kampung Lebor, Gedong has yet to improve and that she was still under strict observation at the ICU. Two other rabies victims -- a 6-year-old girl and her 4-year-old brother from Kampung Paon, Sungai Rimu, in Serian -- died from the disease on Tuesday [6 Jul 2017]. The Sarawak Veterinary Services Department on Friday [7 Jul 2017] said that 771 cats and dogs have been checked at the 5 villages declared rabies-infected, including Kampung Krait, Kampung Paon Rimu Bakung and Kampung Remun in Serian. A total of 690 animals have been vaccinated, while samples of 21 others have been sent to the Veterinary Research Institute in Ipoh, Perak. [Byline: Geryl Ogilvy] -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail [The East Malaysian public's concern and the authorities' strong response deserve to be seen against the background of rabies' absence from this territory for decades. The tragic event seems to have caught both the public and the government by surprise. In fact, until recently, Malaysia was counted among the only 4 Asian countries regarded canine rabies-free (the others are Japan, Singapore and South Korea; ref. 1). Malaysia lost its rabies-free status in 2015, when rabid dogs were reported from north peninsular Malaysia (areas bordering Thailand). There were human exposures with timely PEP treatment. The current event is different: the victims sought treatment when already in their clinical phase. East Malaysia is separated from Peninsular Malaysia by the South China Sea, and there is a long distance (some 750 km) between Serian and the closest shore of Peninsular Malaysia; see map at  ). According to earlier reports, urine samples, saliva, and skin biopsies of the 1st 3 patients (of whom 2 have already died) were sent to the Institute of Medical Research in Kuala Lumpur, where they tested positive for rabies virus. The application of such diagnostic methods has been recently assessed in another Asian country (Ref 2). Those interested in the history of rabies in (Peninsular) Malaysia are referred to Ref. 3. References 1. Hampson K, Coudeville L, Lembo T, Sambo M, Kieffer A, Attlan M, et al. (2015) Estimating the Global Burden of Endemic Canine Rabies. PLoS Negl Trop Dis 9(4): e0003709. doi:10.1371/journal.pntd.0003709 2. Mani, R. S., Anand, A. M. and Madhusudana, S. N. (2016), Human rabies in India: an audit from a rabies diagnostic laboratory. Trop Med Int Health, 21: 556-563. doi:10.1111/tmi.12669 3. Ganesan J., Sinniah M. (1993).Occurrence of Human Rabies in Peninsular Malaysia. Med J Malaysia Vol 48 No 2 June 1993. - Mod.AS A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  .] [", "HENDRA VIRUS, EQUINE - AUSTRALIA (05): (NEW SOUTH WALES) ******************************************************** A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: 9 Jul 2017 Source: 9 News [edited] Horse owners are being urged to remain vigilant after an unvaccinated horse infected with the Hendra virus was euthanised in northern NSW. The infected 11-year-old gelding, from a property near Lismore, is the 1st confirmed case of the virus in NSW this year [2017], Department of Primary Industries chief veterinary officer Dr Christine Middlemiss said in a statement on Sunday [9 Jul 2017]. The horse wasn't eating and was wobbly on its feet on Friday - a day after it was noticed to be lethargic, she said. Flying foxes, or fruit bats, are the natural reservoir of Hendra virus, which can affect humans, horses and dogs. \"Vaccination remains the most effective way of reducing the risk of Hendra virus infection in horses, but good biosecurity and personal hygiene measures should always be practised in conjunction with it,\" she said. Horses should be kept away from trees that are attractive to bats, and feed and water containers should be covered so they can't be contaminated. All known Hendra virus cases have occurred in Queensland or northern NSW. The property near Lismore has been placed under movement restrictions by Local Land Services. -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts [That an infected horse puts its human caretakers at risk of death from this horrible virus should be enough to make people vaccinate. It should be a matter of self-preservation. Vaccination of the horse protects the horse, humans, and dogs. The price of vaccination is small (no matter the cost) to protect everyone. Just think how devastating it would be if your spouse, child, or a neighbor's child caught this disease and died, just for lack of vaccination. Insurance only has to pay for itself once for you to be glad you had it. - Mod.TG A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  .] [", "JAPANESE ENCEPHALITIS AND OTHER - INDIA (08): (ASSAM) ***************************************************** A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Sat 8 Jul 2017 Source: The Times of India [edited] The death toll from encephalitis in Dibrugarh district has touched 20 this year [2017] even as health authorities are trying their best to combat the deadly vector-borne disease. Six people died of Japanese encephalitis (JE) while 14 succumbed to acute encephalitis syndrome (AES). Another 140 persons from the district have tested positive for JE and AES and are undergoing treatment at Assam Medical College and Hospital. Most of the cases were recently reported from the rural pockets of the district. \"Twenty encephalitis deaths have occurred since 1 Jan this year [2017] and 140 have tested positive out of which 27 are JE-affected and 113 have AES. They are at various stages of recovery,\" said Udayan Kumar Baruah, joint director of health services (Dibrugarh) on [Fri 7 Jul 2017]. In view of the grim situation, the health department has already sounded an alert across the district. Rapid response teams comprising of doctors, nurses, ASHA workers and para-medical staff have been formed in the state dispensaries, primary health centres, community health centres, 1st referral units and district hospitals to deal with the situation. The joint director added that long-lasting insecticidal nets (LLIN) and insecticide-treated bed nets (ITBN) were being distributed among people in those pockets found to be highly susceptible to the vector-borne disease. Fogging was also being carried out in several areas of the district. The outbreak of JE in the state usually coincides with the monsoon and post-monsoon seasons which are conducive for mosquitoes to breed. The 3 months from June to August are usually the peak period for the disease. -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail [Assam state is endemic for Japanese encephalitis (JE) virus and cases occur there every year. As with cases of encephalitis in other states in north eastern India, not all cases are due to JE virus and are classified as AES with undetermined etiology. AES is a term used for multiple etiologies or often when no etiology has been determined. As mentioned in many previous comments, the encephalitis picture in north eastern India is complicated. Although JE virus etiology of some previously reported encephalitis cases has been confirmed by laboratory tests, many cases go undiagnosed, or JE virus infection is ruled out, and other etiologies, including Reye syndrome-like disease, possible enterovirus infection from polluted water, heat stroke, scrub typhus ( _Orientia tsutsugamushi_) and lychee fruit consumption, have been proposed. Getting to an accurate diagnosis in these cases of AES will require active field surveillance with epidemiological studies supported by timely laboratory testing. Although avoidance of mosquito bites is prudent, vector control is difficult so vaccination is the best protective measure. No mention of vaccination campaigns is made in the above report. The virus has birds as reservoir hosts and pigs as amplifiers. The _Culex_ mosquito vectors can become very abundant seasonally, breeding in wetlands. - Mod.TY Maps of India can be accessed at  . A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map of India can be accessed at: The HealthMap/Promed map of Assam State, India can be found at:  .] [", "STRANGLES, EQUINE - USA (02): (FLORIDA) EQUINE ********************************************** A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Sat 8 Jul 2017 Source: Outbreak News Today [edited] On [Fri 7 July 2017], one premise in Pinellas County, Florida was placed under quarantine for clinical signs and positive PCR confirmation of strangles, according to an Equine Disease Communication Center (EDCC) alert [Fri 7 July 2017]. The index case became clinical in [Fri 30 Jun 2017]. One of the 5 horses on the property was clinical at time of quarantine. This is the 1st case for Pinellas County and case 25 for Florida in 2017. The highly contagious upper respiratory disease of equids, known as Strangles, is caused by the gram-positive \u03b2-hemolytic bacterium _Streptococcus equi_ ssp. _equi_. The organism, _Streptococcus equi_ ssp._ equi_, can be transmitted via direct contact with nasal or ocular secretions or lymph node discharge from infected horses or via indirect exposure to contaminated trailers, stalls, riding equipment, buckets, halters, lead ropes, brushes, clothing, etc. The incubation period typically ranges between 2 and 6 days but may last up to 14 days. Classic signs may include fever (103 degrees F or higher), mucopurulent nasal discharge, lymphadenopathy (+/- abscessation), general malaise, pharyngitis, dysphagia (difficulty swallowing), upper airway stridor (noisy breathing occurring due to obstructed air flow through a narrowed airway) and respiratory distress. Clinical signs are often age-related, with older horses exhibiting milder signs of shorter duration. -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts [Florida is having a busy year with this disease. It is difficult to look at a horse with strangles as they look so completely miserable (and they are) that it is really heartbreaking. Antimicrobial therapy is controversial. Most authors agree that initiation of antibiotic therapy after abscess formation may provide temporary clinical improvement in fever and depression, but ultimately prolongs the course of disease by delaying maturation of abscesses. Antibiotic therapy is indicated in cases with dyspnea, dysphagia, prolonged high fever, and severe lethargy/anorexia (loss of appetite). Administration of penicillin during the early stage of infection (up to 24 hours after onset of fever) will usually abort abscess formation. The disadvantage of early antimicrobial treatment is failure to mount a protective immune response, rendering horses highly susceptible to infection after cessation of therapy. If antimicrobial therapy is indicated, procaine penicillin (22 000 IU/kg, intramuscular injection, twice a day) is the antibiotic of choice. Portions of this comment were extracted from  . - Mod.TG The HealthMap/ProMED map of Florida, United States: The HealthMap/ProMED map of Pinellas County, Florida, United States:  -Mod.MPP] [", "DICKEYA BLACKLEG, POTATO - AUSTRALIA: FIRST REPORT (WESTERN AUSTRALIA), ALERT ***************************************************************************** A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Thu 6 Jul 2017 8:00 Source: Department of Agriculture & Food, Western Australia [edited] [An] alert was issued [to] potato growers following the detection of a new bacterium. Department Irrigated Agriculture's John Ruprecht said the bacteria _Dickeya dianthicola_ had been confirmed in a commercial potato crop north of Perth. \"The department has measures in place to contain the bacteria and is carrying out tracing and surveillance to determine its spread,\" he said. [The] property where the bacteria have been found is under quarantine. A suspect property and 2 trace properties in the south-west have also been quarantined. Blackleg of potatoes caused by [other] bacteria species already occurs in Australia. _Dickeya dianthicola_ is more aggressive and causes disease at lower infection levels. Other host plants include globe artichoke, chicory, dahlia. _Dickeya dianthicola_ is found on potatoes in Europe and the USA, and in ornamental crops in the USA, Japan, New Zealand. Growers are also reminded to follow good farm biosecurity procedures to prevent the entry, establishment and spread of pests and diseases. -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail [Blackleg of potato can be caused by several species and subspecies of bacteria in the genera _Pectobacterium_ and _Dickeya_. Symptoms may include stem rot leading to leaf yellowing, wilting and stunting of plants, as well as tuber rot, which usually starts at the stem end of the tuber. The bacteria are spread with contaminated plant or other material (including seed tubers, farm machinery), by mechanical means, and with water. Disease management may include seed tuber handling and cultural techniques, use of clean planting material and phytosanitation to prevent introduction of the pathogen from external sources. Low levels of seed tuber infection pose a major risk of pathogen spread, and certification schemes are a vital part of disease management for these pathogens. Population shifts of the blackleg pathogens are being observed in many areas. For example, _P. atrosepticum_ was considered to be the main blackleg pathogen in Europe, until the emergence of the more virulent new species _D. solani_ (ProMED-mail post http://promedmail.org/post/20091207.4162). _P. wasabiae_ and _D. dianthicola_ are also known to cause the disease in Europe. In the US, _D. dianthicola_ has been known to be present on ornamentals but has only recently been observed on potato (ProMED-mail post http://promedmail.org/post/20160509.4211696). _D. solani_ has not yet been detected in the Americas. _P. carotovorum_ subsp. _brasiliensis_ (Pcb) has been reported as a causal agent from a number of countries in different parts of the world, and in the Netherlands it has replaced a predominant _D. solani_ within just a few years (ProMED-mail post http://promedmail.org/post/20160128.3974722). Possible reasons for these population shifts are thought to be climate changes and selection pressure due to intensified agriculture. _Pectobacterium_ and _Dickeya_ species or subspecies also cause bacterial soft rot of potato. The pathogens can also affect other crops, causing, for example, a foot rot disease in rice as well as stem and root rot of sweet potato. Maps Australia (with states): Pictures Symptoms of blackleg on potato shoots: (plant) and (stem) Blackleg, tuber symptoms: and Links Additional news story: (thanks to G. Jackson, Pestnet) Information on potato blackleg (and soft rot):  ,  and Genus _Dickeya_ taxonomy: Taxonomy of other bacteria via:  and  . - Mod.DHA A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  .] [", "TILAPIA SYNCYTIAL HEPATITIS - TAIWAN (03): (TAYOUAN CITY), UPDATE ***************************************************************** A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Thu 6 Jul 2017 22:57:48 Source: Focus Taiwan [edited] A total of 2 more tilapia fish farms in Taoyuan have been hit by the tilapia lake virus (TiLV), bringing the total number of farms affected to 9 since the virus was 1st reported in the city in June [2017], the Council of Agriculture (COA) said. All 9 infected fish farms are in the city's Guanyin District, according to Shih Tai-hua, deputy director-general of COA's Bureau of Animal and Plant Health Inspection and Quarantine. Since the virus was 1st reported in Taoyuan on June 13 [2017], the city government has ordered inspections of all ponds within a 3-kilometer [1.86 miles] radius of the site, which included 22 other tilapia farms. On June 23 [2017], the inspections were expanded to cover a 5-kilometer [3.10 miles] radius, hence adding 24 more farms to the list. Shih said the results of the recent inspections showed that 2 more ponds have been struck by the lake virus. Although the virus only infects tilapia and there is no risk of it being passed on to humans, it is incurable and is listed as a major infectious disease by the World Organization for Animal Health (OIE). Because the TiLV was only discovered recently, the lack of data pertaining to this new disease has made it difficult for the government to determine where it came from, according to COA Deputy Minister Huang Jin-cheng. The government has since stepped up measures to contain an outbreak of tilapia lake virus, he said. To date, 7 countries have reported the presence of TiLV, after Colombia, Ecuador, Egypt, Israel, Thailand, China, and Taiwan. [Byline: Yang Shu-min and Ko Lin] -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts [A novel orthomyxo-like virus named tilapia lake virus (TiLV) has been described recently and found to be the cause of mortality of wild tilapia, 1st observed in the Sea of Galilee and in commercial ponds in Israel and Ecuador, and more recently in Egypt, Thailand and Taiwan. Information about the disease is available in this document published by the OIE:  . - Mod.PMB A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  .] [", "LASSA FEVER - WEST AFRICA (26): NIGERIA *************************************** A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases In this report: [1] Plateau state fatality [2] National summary ****** [1] Plateau state fatality Date: Sat 8 Jul 2017 9:34 AM Source: Vanguard [edited] A student of Federal Government Girls College, FGGC, Langtang in Plateau State has been confirmed dead as a result of fresh outbreak of Lassa fever, the State Commissioner for Health, Kuden Kamshak confirmed. He added modality has been put in place to curtail its spread as the disease is not new to the State. Also, a statement issued yesterday [Fri 7 Jul 2017] after the burial of the deceased student and signed by Nkiruka Pedro-Iyalla, for the Exco of the School's Old Girls' Association said, \"the student passed away at the Jos University Teaching Hospital (JUTH) on [Sat 1 Jul 2017] after showing symptoms of Typhoid Fever.\" The Association which had been in close touch with the School authority added, \"There were rumours of several other students also being ill with the same symptoms who were sent home. But this turns out to be incorrect as 3 other students were confirmed to be admitted at JUTH and are being treated for different ailments. \"One of them was being treated for perforated intestine and has had surgery; the other fell and injured herself while the 3rd is being managed for renal problems.\" Mr Magaji, a senior member of staff at the school, personally visited the family of the deceased and the girls being treated at JUTH over the weekend.\" Meanwhile, the school Authority has taken steps to help forestall any major health outbreak as the resumption of students from Mid-term break has been moved by one week. Instead of 2 July 2017, the students will be expected back on 9 July 2017. All the water sources at the school have been treated and representatives of the Plateau State Water Board have taken samples for testing and fumigation of the entire school compound is ongoing and should be concluded today [Sat 8 Jul 2017]. The SS3 girls are currently in the school on Extension and so far, none of the girls is ill. The head nurse at the clinic has also confirmed that none of the SS3 students has reported any illness in the past 2 weeks. [Bylibe: Marie-Therese Nanlong] -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail Rapporteur Mary Marshall [Plateau state is endemic for Lassa fever virus. The above report provides no information about the circumstances under which the girl became infected. Maps of Nigeria can be accessed at  and  . - Mod.TY A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  . ****** [2] National summary Date: Fri 30 Jun 2017 Source: Nigeria Centre for Disease Control [NCDC] Weekly Epidemiological Report 7(24) [edited] 1. Lassa fever Please note that the data reflects the routine reports i.e. all suspected cases including the laboratory positive and negative cases 1.1. A total of 6 suspected cases of Lassa fever with 3 Laboratory confirmed and one death were reported from 4 LGAs (Edo, Ondo and Plateau States) in week 24, 2017 compared with zero case at the same period in 2016. 1.2. Laboratory results of the 6 suspected cases were 3 positives (Edo - 2 and Ondo - 1) and 3 pending (Plateau - 3). 1.3. Between weeks 1 and 24 (2017), 308 suspected Lassa fever cases with 69 laboratory confirmed cases and 50 deaths (CFR, 16.23 percent) from 61 LGAs (22 States) were reported compared with 717 suspected cases with 71 laboratory confirmed cases and 87 deaths (CFR, 12.15 percent) from 125 LGAs (27 States) during the same period in 2016 (Figure 1). 1.4. Between weeks 1 and 52 2016, 921 suspected Lassa fever cases with 109 laboratory confirmed cases and 119 deaths (CFR, 12.92 percent) from 144 LGAs (28 States and FCT) were reported compared with 430 suspected cases with 25 laboratory confirmed cases and 40 deaths (CFR, 9.30 percent) from 37 LGAs (14 States and FCT) during the same period in 2015 (Figure 2). 1.5. Investigation and active case search ongoing in affected States with coordination of response activities by the NCDC with support from partners. 1.5.1. National Lassa Fever Working Group meeting and weekly National Surveillance and Outbreak Response meeting on-going at NCDC to keep abreast of the current Lassa fever situation in the country. 1.5.2. Response materials for VHFs prepositioned across the country by NCDC at the beginning of the dry season 1.5.3. New VHF guidelines have been developed by the NCDC (Interim National Viral Haemorrhagic Fevers Preparedness guidelines and Standard Operating Procedures for Lassa fever management). 1.5.4. Ongoing reclassification of reported Lassa fever cases 1.5.5. Ongoing review of the variables for case-based surveillance for VHF 1.5.6. VHF case-based forms completed by affected States are being entered into the new VHF management system. This system allows for the creation of a VHF database for the country. 1.5.7. NCDC team sent to Edo State to support Lassa fever data harmonization and Updating of VHF case-based management database. 1.5.8. Confirmed cases are being treated at identified treatment/isolation centres across the States with Ribavirin and necessary supportive management also instituted 1.5.9. Onsite support was earlier provided to Ogun, Nasarawa, Taraba, Ondo and Borno States by the NCDC and partners 1.5.10. Offsite support provided by NCDC/partners in all affected States 1.5.11. NCDC and partners are providing onsite support in Ondo State 1.5.12. States are enjoined to intensify surveillance and promote Infection, Prevention and Control (IPC) measures in health facilities. Figure 1: Map of Nigeria showing areas affected by Lassa fever, week 1 - 24, 2016 and 2017 Figure 2: Map of Nigeria showing areas affected by Lassa fever, week 1 - 53, 2015 and week 1 - 52, 2016 Table of cases by state, cumulative data weeks 1-24 [1 Jan-19 30 Jun 2017]: State: Cases / Lab Confirmed / Deaths Adamawa: 6 / 0 / 2 Anambra: 1 / 1 / 0 Bauchi: 9 / 3 / 3 Cross River: 7 / 0 /1 Ebonyi: 4 / 1 / 1 Edo: 122 / 28 / 9 Enugu: 1 / 1 / 1 FCT: 2 / 0 / 0 Gombe: 15 / 0 / 1 Jigawa: 1 / 0 / 0 Kadun: 1 / 0 / 0 Kano: 23 / 2 / 10 Katsina: 3 / 0 / 0 Kebbi: 1 / 0 / 1 Kogi: 3 / 1 / 1 Nasarawa: 28 / 6 / 2 Ogun: 12 / 1 / 0 Ondo: 14 / 7 / 2 Plateau:10 / 5 / 6 Rivers: 6 / 1 / 0 Taraba: 38 / 12 / 9 Yobe: 1 / 0 / 1 Total: 308 / 69 /50 -- Communicated by: Olutayo Olajide Babalobi Lecturer and Consultant Epizootiologist (One Health, Participatory Epizootiology and Veterinary ICT Research Group) Department of Veterinary Public Health and Preventive Medicine Faculty of Veterinary Medicine University of Ibadan Ibadan, Nigeria [The numbers of cases and deaths from Lass fever continue to slowly increase. As noted in earlier comments, Lassa fever remains a problem in Nigeria because the virus is endemic there. Virus transmission to humans occurs when people are in contact with the reservoir rodent host, the multimammate mouse (in the genus _Mastomys_) or their excreta. Transmission also occurs in health facilities when personal protective equipment is not employed and barrier nursing practices are not adequate to protect staff from blood and secretions of infected patients. Images of _Mastomys_ mice, the rodent reservoir of Lass fever virus, can be seen at  . Once again, Dr Olutayo Olajide Babalobi is thanked for sending in the above Epidemiological Report. - Mod.TY A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  .] [", "EQUINE INFECTIOUS ANEMIA - SWITZERLAND: (AARGAU), FIRST CASE ************************************************************ A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Sun 10 Jul 2017 Source: Aargauer Zeitung (AZ) [German, mach-transl, summarised, edited] A case of Equine Infectious Anemia (EIA) has been diagnosed in M\u00fclligen, canton Aargau; this is the 1st case of EIA in Switzerland since 1991. EIA is notifiable for horses and other solipeds like donkeys and mules. The cantonal veterinary service has declared the Birrfeld area as a restricted zone for the said. The disease does not affect humans and other animal species. So far, there is no evidence that the disease has spread beyond M\u00fclligen. Infected animals, such as the one in M\u00fclligen, must be killed. The remaining horses kept in the stable are placed under quarantine and should be strictly watched as required by the cantonal veterinary service. The disease is transmitted by arthropods; all horses and other solipeds kept in the restricted area may be left in the open if they have been previously protected by effective insecticides. According to the Animal Disease Regulation, a restricted area of one km [approx. 0.62 miles] around the contaminated horse farm should be implemented. Therefore, the cantonal veterinary service has declared the entire Birrfeld area to the restricted area [map included; see source url]. Within the said zone, all trade and traffic with horses is prohibited for 90 days. Horses and other solipeds should enter or leave the restricted area only with the written authorization of the cantonal veterinary service. Exhibitions, tournaments and similar events are prohibited in the restricted area until the cantonal veterinary service repeals the restricted area; presumably, after expiry of the statutory period of 90 days. Not affected by the measure is the transport of horses across the highway. -- Communicated by: Sabine Zentis Castleview English Longhorns Gut Laach D-52385 Nideggen Germany [Switzerland has become the 3rd European country involved in the EIA event which reportedly started in Germany on 2 Jan 2017 and in the Netherlands on 28 Jun 2017. According to the following update of the transboundary event (summarized), published by the German web-site \"wir-sind-vet\" (\"we are vets\"), so far 15 horses have been officially confirmed as EIA-infected, of which 13 in Germany, one in the Netherlands and one in Switzerland. Most if not all the involved animals are polo horses; M\u00fclligen is located in the Canton of Aargau, home to one of the 10 Swiss poloclubs. Officially the reference to the polo sport is not confirmed, but the restricted area includes the address of the club. No evidence for direct connection between the Dutch case and Germany could be found so far; the horse from the Poloclub Vreeland (Utrecht / 63 horses) was never in Germany according to Bob Rademakers, secretary of the Dutch polo association. According to the daily Bildzeitung, the horses infected in Hamburg were all from the same stable in Argentina and came to Germany 5 years ago. Even horses tested positive in other countries would come from that Argentine barn. This has been confirmed by a spokesman for the Altona district in Hamburg. According to \"wir-sind-vet\", the Friedrich-Loeffler-Institut (FLI - National Reference Laboratory for EIA) has also confirmed the connection with the polo sport. The track to Argentina, however, is not officially communicated by the FLI. The above and additional information, including a map of the German locations where positive horses have been detected, is available at  . (Thanks to communicator SZ for providing the link). Some of the above cited data are still in need of authoritative confirmation. Subscribers are reminded about the lifelong, persisting infection in EIA-affected horses, which could be subclinical; hence, the term \"outbreak\" should not be regarded always as indicative of a new, fresh EIA case. Though apparently a \"rolling event\", detection of new cases/affected countries does not necessarily reflect a sequential order of infection. - Mod.AS A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  .] [", "CHOLERA, DIARRHEA AND DYSENTERY UPDATE (70): ASIA (YEMEN) ********************************************************* A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Tue 11 Jul 2017 Source: Anadolu Agency [edited] At least 1732 people have been killed by a cholera outbreak in war-torn Yemen since late April 2017, according to the WHO. A total of 313 538 suspected cases of cholera have been registered in 21 Yemeni provinces, the WHO said on [Tue 11 Jul 2017]. The northwestern Hajjah province is the hardest-hit by the disease, while the southern province of Socotra remains the only Yemeni province where the cholera epidemic has not spread. Impoverished Yemen has remained in a state of civil war since 2014, when Houthi rebels overran much of the country, including the capital Sana'a. In 2015, Saudi Arabia and its Arab allies launched a massive air campaign aimed at reversing Houthi military gains and shoring up Yemen's embattled government. According to UN officials, more than 10 000 people have been killed in the war, while more than 11 percent of the country's population has been displaced as a direct result of the conflict. [Byline: Zakaria al-Kamali] -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail [The statistics of the dreadfully impressive ongoing epidemic in Yemen in 2017 are: Date (2017) / Cases / Deaths 8 May / 1360 / 25 11 May / 2752 / 51 13 May / 8595 / 115 14 May / 11 000 / 180 17 May / 17 200 / 209 19 May / 23 500 / 242 21 May / 29 300 / 315 22 May / 35 217 / 361 24 May / 42 207 / 420 27 May / 51 832 / 471 30 May / 65 300 / 532 2 Jun / 73 700 / 605 4 Jun / 86 400 / 676 5 Jun / 91 400 / 728 6 Jun / 96 000 / 746 7 Jun / 101 820 / 789 10 Jun / 116 700 / 869 12 Jun / 124 002 / 923 14 Jun / 140 116 / 989 16 Jun / 151 000 / 1054 19 Jun / 166 976 / 1146 21 Jun / 179 548 / 1205 23 Jun / 200 000 / 1310 26 Jun / 219 000 / 1400 28 Jun / 231 364 / 1439 30 Jun / 240 000 / 1500 04 Jul / 275 987 / 1634 07 Jul / 297 438 / 1706 10 Jul / 313 538 / 1732 In the last complete year of data (2015), WHO ( ) reported a total of 172 454 cases worldwide in 42 countries. This continuing cholera disaster in Yemen is only about 10 weeks old and is rapidly approaching twice the whole 2015 total of cases. - Mod.LL A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  .] [", "CHIKUNGUNYA (23): ASIA (BANGLADESH), CASE NUMBERS ************************************************* A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases Date: Mon 10 Jul 2017 10 00:21:35.0 BdST Source: bdnews24.com [edited] The government's disease monitoring arm has refuted media reports on chikungunya saying 'confusion' has been created over the number of people suffering from the viral disease. The IEDCR released a statement on [Sun 9 Jul 2017] saying the story of one in 11 people suffering from this Aedes Aegypti mosquito-borne disease being published in the media is \"not correct\". It pointed out that the report might have been picked up from an incomplete telephone-based survey of the IEDCR. It had conducted a telephone-based survey among 4775 people. Of them, 357 gave the information that they were suffering from fever and joint pain, the symptoms of chikungunya. But they were not tested later for the confirmation of the disease. The IEDCR said the survey was still ongoing and data compilation and analysis incomplete. Based on that survey, none should come to any conclusion, the disease monitoring agency said. It does not provide any information regarding the number of chikungunya patients but gives an idea about the presence of the disease, said the statement. Chikungunya has struck so much fear into the people that a lawyer has even filed a writ petition in the court demanding proper actions. The High Court on [Sun 9 Jul 2017] issued a rule asking why it will not order authorities to compensate patients diagnosed with chikungunya. However, IEDCR had advised the people from the beginning not to trouble themselves with running tests for the disease since it does not have any treatment. Both dengue and chikungunya show some common symptoms such as fever and pain. But in chikungunya the pain is so severe that people cannot move. It involves all the joints, doctors say. It can be misdiagnosed, but both of them have no specific treatment. Treatment is mainly focused on relieving the symptoms. Paracetamol is the drug of choice for relieving both fever and pain. So there is no need to wait for testing, experts say. General awareness is important as the Aedes mosquito usually breeds in a small collection of clean water in and around houses, such as inside a flower vase. Intermittent rains cause a proliferation of the breeding when water accumulates in different containers around homes. The IEDCR advises removal of all open containers with stagnant water in and around the houses on a regular basis - flower plates and pots, used tires, tree holes and rock pools. However, the institute could not explain the reports of widespread fever in the capital. -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail [The 1st identified chikungunya outbreak occurred in Bangladesh in 2008. Later in 2011, a major outbreak was reported from Dhaka district, which was later confirmed to be chikungunya ( ). This indicates that both the virus and the vector are prevalent in the country, resulting in outbreaks in various geographical areas. Efforts to improve surveillance and identify outbreaks more quickly could provide an opportunity for public health actions, such as mosquito control, to reduce transmission. WHO guidelines suggest that environmental interventions, such as destroying natural and human-made mosquito breeding sites in and around homes, may be more cost-effective than chemical methods to kill larvae and adult mosquitoes [WHO Guidelines for Prevention and Control of Chikungunya Fever. 2009]. In the report above, as the available information on actual laboratory confirmed Chikungunya cases is not available, even though the data from the survey indicates that the case numbers might be lower, the factual situation can only be ascertained through sentinel or other surveillance initiatives supported by laboratory diagnostics. - Mod.UBA A HealthMap/ProMED-mail map can be accessed at:  .] [", "AVIAN INFLUENZA, HUMAN (62): CHINA, H7N9, CASES, RESEARCH ********************************************************* A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases In this posting: [1] Xinjiang Uygur Autonomous Region - Hong Kong alert [2] Xinjiang Uygur Autonomous Region [3] Research ****** [1] Xinjiang Uygur Autonomous Region - Hong Kong alert Date: Fri 7 Jul 2017 18:39 Source: The Government of Hong Kong Press Release [edited] The Centre for Health Protection (CHP) of the Department of Health is today [Fri 7 Jul 2017] monitoring a notification from the National Health and Family Planning Commission about one additional human case of avian influenza A(H7N9) which was recorded from [30 Jun 2017 to 6 Jul 2017] in Xinjiang Uygur Autonomous Region. It strongly urged the public to maintain strict personal, food and environmental hygiene both locally and during travel. The 35-year-old male patient, who was known to have sold and slaughtered live chickens at a market, had onset on [23 Jun 2017] and subsequently passed away on [30 Jun 2017]. Travellers to the Mainland or other affected areas must avoid visiting wet markets, live poultry markets or farms. They should be alert to the presence of backyard poultry when visiting relatives and friends. They should also avoid purchasing live or freshly slaughtered poultry, and avoid touching poultry/birds or their droppings. They should strictly observe personal and hand hygiene when visiting any place with live poultry. Travellers returning from affected areas should consult a doctor promptly if symptoms develop, and inform the doctor of their travel history for prompt diagnosis and treatment of potential diseases. It is essential to tell the doctor if they have seen any live poultry during travel, which may imply possible exposure to contaminated environments. This will enable the doctor to assess the possibility of avian influenza and arrange necessary investigations and appropriate treatment in a timely manner. While local surveillance, prevention and control measures are in place, the CHP will remain vigilant and work closely with the World Health Organization and relevant health authorities to monitor the latest developments. The CHP's Port Health Office conducts health surveillance measures at all boundary control points. Thermal imaging systems are in place for body temperature checks on inbound travellers. Suspected cases will be immediately referred to public hospitals for follow-up. The display of posters and broadcasting of health messages in departure and arrival halls as health education for travellers is under way. The travel industry and other stakeholders are regularly updated on the latest information. The public should maintain strict personal, hand, food and environmental hygiene and take heed of the advice below while handling poultry:  - Avoid touching poultry, birds, animals or their droppings;  - When buying live chickens, do not touch them and their droppings. Do not blow at their bottoms. Wash eggs with detergent if soiled with faecal matter and cook and consume them immediately.  - Always wash hands thoroughly with soap and water after handling chickens and eggs;  - Eggs should be cooked well until the white and yolk become firm. Do not eat raw eggs or dip cooked food into any sauce with raw eggs. Poultry should be cooked thoroughly. If there is pinkish juice running from the cooked poultry or the middle part of its bone is still red, the poultry should be cooked again until fully done;  - Wash hands frequently, especially before touching the mouth, nose or eyes, before handling food or eating, and after going to the toilet, touching public installations or equipment such as escalator handrails, elevator control panels or door knobs, or when hands are dirtied by respiratory secretions after coughing or sneezing; and  - Wear a mask if fever or respiratory symptoms develop, when going to a hospital or clinic, or while taking care of patients with fever or respiratory symptoms. The public may visit the CHP's pages for more information: the avian influenza page, the weekly Avian Influenza Report, global statistics and affected areas of avian influenza, the Facebook Page and the YouTube Channel. -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail [The HealthMap/ProMED map of Xinjiang, China can be found at:  . - Mod.MPP] ****** [2] Xinjiang Uygur Autonomous Region Date: Sat 8 Jul 2017 19:40 PM Source: FIC (Flu Information Centre/Flu in China) [edited] Xinjiang Construction Corp reported one human H7N9 AIV fatal case on [Fri 30 Jun 2017]. This is the 1st human H7N9 AIV case reported by Xinjiang Construstion Corp in 2017. The 35-year-old male patient, lived in Kuitun city. He had engaged in selling and slaughtering live chickens at local live poultry market with his parents. The patient had onset of ILI symptoms(fever, cough, sore throat, fatigue and shivering) on [Fri 23 Jun 2017], he was reported as suspected human H7N9 case on [Thu 29 Jun 2017], his samples tested positive for H7N9 by CDC on [Fri 30 Jun 2017] and he subsequently passed away that night due to respiratory failure. All close contacts are under medical monitoring. -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail ****** [3] Research Date: Thu 6 Jul 2017 Source: Eurosurveillance [edited] Abstract: We describe the epidemiology of highly pathogenic avian influenza (HPAI) A(H7N9) based on poultry market environmental surveillance and laboratory-confirmed human cases (n=9) in Guangdong, China. We also compare the epidemiology between human cases of high - and low-pathogenic avian influenza A(H7N9) (n=51) in Guangdong. Case fatality and severity were similar. Touching sick or dead poultry was the most important risk factor for HPAI A(H7N9) infections and should be highlighted for the control of future influenza A(H7N9) epidemics. -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail --- Date: Thu 6 Jul 2017 Source: Vaccine [edited] Abstract: Background: We conducted a phase I/II clinical trial to evaluate the safety and immunogenicity of a Madin-Darby canine kidney (MDCK) cell-grown inactivated H7N9 influenza vaccine for pandemic preparedness purposes. Methods: Between [7 Apr 2015] and 27 May 2016, healthy adults aged 20-60 years were enrolled sequentially in phase I (n=40) and phase II (n=160) from 3 hospitals in Taiwan and randomized to receive 2 doses of whole-virus H7N9 vaccine (15 or 30\u03bcg hemagglutinin antigen (HA) with or without an aluminum hydroxide adjuvant) at 21-day intervals. Safety up to 180 days and changes in hemagglutinin inhibition (HI) titers at 21 days after each vaccination was determined. Results: Of the 200 randomized subjects, 193 (96.5 percent) received 2 doses of the study vaccine and were included in the intention-to-treat analysis for safety, and 190 (95 percent) were included in the per-protocol analysis for immunogenicity. Most adverse events were mild and transient; no death or vaccine-related serious adverse events were reported. Overall, higher immune responses were observed in the groups administered with 30\u03bcgHA formulation than in the other 2 groups administered with 15\u03bcgHA formulation. The highest immune response was observed in subjects who received 2 doses of the adjuvanted vaccine containing 30\u03bcgHA with HI titer, sero-protection rate, sero-conversion rate, and sero-conversion factor of 36.2, 64.6 percent, 64.6 percent and 5.7, respectively. Conclusions: Our study demonstrated that the H7N9 influenza vaccine containing 30\u03bcgHA with aluminum hydroxide adjuvant was immunogenic and safe in adults aged 20-60 years. -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail [Research on an effective vaccine against Influenza A/H7N9 is pertinent as the case numbers as well as the severity of cases are showing an upward trend. - Mod.UBA] [", "GONOCOCCAL DISEASE - ANTIBIOTIC RESISTANCE, WHO *********************************************** A ProMED-mail post ProMED-mail is a program of the International Society for Infectious Diseases [1] Date: Sat 8 Jul 2017 Source: News Nation Bureau [edited] Resistance to antibiotics is creating difficulty in treating gonorrhea and sometimes making it impossible to treat, according to the World Health Organization (WHO) reports based on data from 77 countries. In India, there is an immense increase in antibiotic resistance. Much of the problem arises due to over prescription of drugs by doctors and irrational over-the counter sale of antibiotics. The data was evaluated through 2 latest studies published in international journal PLOS [1,2]. According to the data, each year around 78 million people are infected with gonorrhea on a global level. However, this might be an underestimation because only those countries where surveillance is best and with particularly with high income have cases of infection that cannot be treated by all known antibiotics. \"These cases may just be the tip of the iceberg, since systems to diagnose and report untreatable infections are lacking in lower-income countries where gonorrhoea is actually more common,\" said Dr Teodora Wi, medical officer, human reproduction, WHO. \"The bacteria that cause gonorrhoea are particularly smart. Every time we use a new class of antibiotics to treat the infection, the bacteria evolves to resist them,\" he added. According to WHO Global Gonococcal Antimicrobial Surveillance Programme, in the years 2009-2014 (97 percent of countries that reported data in that period found drug-resistant strains) a widespread resistance to ciprofloxacin was found, resistance to azithromycin was reported by 81 percent countries, and the emergence of resistance to the current last-resort treatment, the extended-spectrum cephalosporins (ESCs) oral cefixime or injectable ceftriaxone was 66 percent. -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail from HealthMap Alerts [1. Wi T, Lahra MM, Ndowa F, et al. Antimicrobial resistance in _Neisseria gonorrhoeae_: Global surveillance and a call for international collaborative action. PLOS Published: July 7, 2017 Available at: 2. Alirol E, Wi TE, Bala M, et al. Multidrug-resistant gonorrhoea: A research and development roadmap to discover new medicines (PDF). Available at:  .] ****** [2] Date: Fri 7 Jul 2017 Source: WHO [edited] Antibiotic-resistant gonorrhoea on the rise, new drugs needed ------------------------------------------------------------- Data from 77 countries show that antibiotic resistance is making gonorrhoea - a common sexually-transmitted infection - much harder, and sometimes impossible, to treat. \"The bacteria that cause gonorrhoea are particularly smart. Every time we use a new class of antibiotics to treat the infection, the bacteria evolve to resist them,\" said Dr Teodora Wi, Medical Officer, Human Reproduction, at WHO. WHO reports widespread resistance to older and cheaper antibiotics. Some countries - particularly high-income ones, where surveillance is best - are finding cases of the infection that are untreatable by all known antibiotics. \"These cases may just be the tip of the iceberg, since systems to diagnose and report untreatable infections are lacking in lower-income countries where gonorrhoea is actually more common,\" adds Dr Wi. Each year, an estimated 78 million people are infected with gonorrhoea*. Gonorrhoea can infect the genitals, rectum, and throat. Complications of gonorrhoea disproportionally affect women, including pelvic inflammatory disease, ectopic pregnancy and infertility, as well as an increased risk of HIV. Decreasing condom use, increased urbanization and travel, poor infection detection rates, and inadequate or failed treatment all contribute to this increase. The WHO Global Gonococcal Antimicrobial Surveillance Programme (WHO GASP), monitors trends in drug-resistant gonorrhoea. WHO GASP data from 2009 to 2014 find widespread resistance to ciprofloxacin [97 percent of countries that reported data in that period found drug-resistant strains], increasing resistance to azithromycin [81 percent [of countries]], and the emergence of resistance to the current last-resort treatment, the extended-spectrum cephalosporins (ESCs) oral cefixime or injectable ceftriaxone [66 percent of countries]]. Currently, in most countries, ESCs are the only single antibiotics that remain effective for treating gonorrhoea. But resistance to cefixime - and more rarely to ceftriaxone - has now been reported in more than 50 countries. As a result, WHO issued updated global treatment recommendations in 2016 advising doctors to give 2 antibiotics: ceftriaxone and azithromycin. The R&D pipeline for gonorrhoea is relatively empty, with only 3 new candidate drugs in various stages of clinical development: solithromycin, for which a phase III trial has recently been completed; zoliflodacin, which has completed a phase II trial; and gepotidacin, which has also completed a phase II trial. The development of new antibiotics is not very attractive for commercial pharmaceutical companies. Treatments are taken only for short periods of time (unlike medicines for chronic diseases) and they become less effective as resistance develops, meaning that the supply of new drugs constantly needs to be replenished. The Drugs for Neglected Diseases initiative (DNDi) and WHO have launched the Global Antibiotic Research and Development Partnership (GARDP), a not-for-profit research and development organization, hosted by DNDi, to address this issue. GARDP's mission is to develop new antibiotic treatments and promote appropriate use, so that they remain effective for as long as possible, while ensuring access for all in need. One of GARDP's key priorities is the development of new antibiotic treatments for gonorrhoea. \"To address the pressing need for new treatments for gonorrhoea, we urgently need to seize the opportunities we have with existing drugs and candidates in the pipeline. In the short term, we aim to accelerate the development and introduction of at least one of these pipeline drugs, and will evaluate the possible development of combination treatments for public health use,\" said Dr Manica Balasegaram, GARDP Director. \"Any new treatment developed should be accessible to everyone who needs it, while ensuring it's used appropriately, so that drug resistance is slowed as much as possible.\" Gonorrhoea can be prevented through safer sexual behaviour, in particular consistent and correct condom use. Information, education, and communication can promote and enable safer sex practices, improve people's ability to recognize the symptoms of gonorrhoea and other sexually transmitted infections, and increase the likelihood they will seek care. Today, lack of public awareness, lack of training of health workers, and stigma around sexually transmitted infections remain barriers to greater and more effective use of these interventions. There are no affordable, rapid, point-of-care diagnostic tests for gonorrhoea. Many people who are infected with gonorrhoea do not have any symptoms, so they go undiagnosed and untreated. On the other hand, however, when patients do have symptoms, such as discharge from the urethra or the vagina, doctors often assume it is gonorrhoea and prescribe antibiotics - even though people may be suffering from another kind of infection. The overall inappropriate use of antibiotics increases the development of antibiotic resistance in gonorrhoea as well as other bacterial diseases. \"To control gonorrhoea, we need new tools and systems for better prevention, treatment, earlier diagnosis, and more complete tracking and reporting of new infections, antibiotic use, resistance and treatment failures,\" said Dr Marc Sprenger, Director of Antimicrobial Resistance at WHO. \"Specifically, we need new antibiotics, as well as rapid, accurate, point-of-care diagnostic tests - ideally, ones that can predict which antibiotics will work on that particular infection - and longer term, a vaccine to prevent gonorrhoea.\" -- Communicated by: ProMED-mail [For a discussion of antibiotic resistance in _Neisseria gonorrhoeae_, please see my moderator comments in the prior ProMED-mail post Gonococcal disease - UK: azithromycin resistance, RFI http://promedmail.org/post/20150919.3656467 below. - Mod.ML] [", "ProMED-mail  SUBMIT INFO  MAKE A DONATION  SUBSCRIBE  About ProMED  Announcements  Links  Calendar of Events  Supporters  ProMED-mail  Portugu\u00eas  Espa&ntilde;ol  &#1056;&#1091;&#1089;&#1089;&#1082;&#1080;&#1081;  Mekong Basin  Afrique Francophone  Anglophone Africa  South Asia  Middle East/North Africa  ProMED-mail  About ProMED-mail&raquo;  Errata  Hot Topics  Plants  Search  Latest  Latest Posts on ProMED-mail  Search the ProMED archives  Archive number:  OR keyword(s) in:  Subject  Post  exclude see also use \"AND\" or \"OR\" between multiple keywords [ MORE SEARCH TIPS ]  include archive number in results  Date Range (optional):  -  ProMED-mail  ProMED-ESP  ProMED-RUS  ProMED-MBDS  ProMED-FRA  ProMED-PORT  ProMED-EAFR  ProMED-SoAs  ProMED-MENA  Plants  Latest Posts about Plant Diseases  Latest Posts by Topic  Errata  ProMED-mail alerts on HealthMap  View Full Map &raquo;  Follow us on:  International Society for Infectious Diseases | 9 Babcock St, Unit 3, Brookline, MA 02446 \u00b7 USA | T (617) 277-0551 | F (617) 278-9113 |  E info@isid.org &copy; 2010 International Society for Infectious Diseases. All rights reserved."]